

--- PAGE 1 ---
252 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 63, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016
Evaluation of Polarization Effects of Collection
Schottky CdTe Medipix3RX Hybrid Pixel Detector
V ytautas Astromskas, Eva N. Gimenez, Annika Lohstroh, and Nicola Tartoni , Member , IEEE
Abstract—This paper focuses on the evaluation of operational
conditions such as temperature, exposure time and ﬂux on the
polarization of a Schottky electron collection CdTe detector. A
Schottky collection CdTe Medipix3RX hybrid pixel detector
was developed as a part of the CALIPSO-HIZPAD2 EU project.
The pixel matrix and 0.75 mm thick CdTe sensor
bump-bonded to Medipix3RX readout chips enabled the study
of the polarization effects. Single and quad module Medipix3RX
chips were used which had
and pixel
matrices, respectively. This study reports the sensor-level and
pixel-level polarization effects of the detector obtained from a
laboratory X-ray source. We report that the sensor-level polar-
ization is highly dependent on temperature, ﬂux and exposure
time. Furthermore, the study of pixel-level polarization effects led
to identiﬁcation of a new type of pixel behaviour that is charac-
terised by three distinct phases and, thus, named “tri-phase” (3-P)
pixels. The 3-P pixels were the dominant cause of degradation
of the ﬂat-ﬁeld image uniformity under high ﬂux operation. A
new method of identifying the optimum operational conditions
that utilises a criterion related to the 3-P pixels is proposed. A
generated optimum operational c onditions chart under the new
method is reported. The criterion is used for bias voltage reset de-
polarization of the detector. The method successfully represented
the dependency of polarization o n temperature, ﬂux and exposure
time and was reproducible for multiple sensors. Operating the de-
tector under the 3-P pixel criterion resulted in the total efﬁciency
not falling below 95%.
Index Terms— Medipix, polarization, Schottky CdTe, semicon-
ductor radiation detectors, tri-phase pixels.
I. I NTRODUCTION
C
ADMIUM TELLURIDE’s (CdTe) attractive properties
such as high resistivity at room temperature and large
linear attenuation coefﬁcient make it a prospective semicon-
ductor for room-temperature X- and gamma-ray radiation de-
tectors. Recent improvements in c rystal growth techniques al-
lows the manufacturing of large area homogeneous crystals with
electrical properties suitable f or applications such as medical
Manuscript received July 16, 2015; r evised November 06, 2015; accepted
January 03, 2016. Date of publication February 03, 2016; date of current ve rsion
February 16, 2016. This project was supported by SEPnet and the HIZPAD2
Joint Research Activity, part of the Eu ropean funded CALIPSO project, gra nt
agreement 312284.
V. Astromskas and A. Lohstroh are with the University of Surrey, Guild-
ford GU2 7XH, U.K. (e-mail: v.astromskas@surrey.ac.uk; a.lohstroh@sur rey.
ac.uk).
E. N. Gimenez and N. Tartoni are with Diamond Light Source Ltd.,
Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0DE, U.K. (e-mail: nicola.tartoni@diamond.ac .uk;
eva.gimenez-navarro@diamond.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available onlin e
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNS.2016.2516827
imaging, material science, sync hrotron, and ast rophysical ap-
plications [1], [2]. However, Cd Te detectors, especially those
with Schottky contacts, suffer fr om “polarization” effects that
strongly affect the imaging performance of the detector, and in
some cases cannot be suitably corrected by applying ﬂat-ﬁeld
corrections [3].
Polarization causes a change in the detector’s performance
after biasing the sensor, and l e a d st oar e d u c t i o ni nc o u n tr a t e
over time and loss of charge coll ection efﬁciency. Polarization
arises from trapping and de-tr apping of ionized deep-level ac-
ceptors inside the crystal which affects the space-charge and
electric ﬁeld distribution [4]. The rate of polarization is inﬂu-
enced by operational conditions such as temperature, radiation
ﬂux, and duration of illumination [5]. Application of high bias
voltages and operation at low temperatures can help to stabilize
the detector’s performance [4]. The most common method of
depolarizing a detector is to reset the applied bias voltage which
completely recovers the detector ’s performance [6]. However,
to date no standardized procedure for depolarization has been
established that identiﬁes th e optimum operational conditions
the detector should be operated at in order to minimize the reset
duration dead time in addition to minimizing the degradation
of imaging quality. Hybrid small-pixel detectors can provide
insight into the space-charge uni formity of the sensor. In hy-
brid detectors each pixel is individually connected to its elec-
tronic chain [7]. Previous studi es of CdTe pixelated detectors
have identiﬁed three types of pixel behaviour. Firstly, the ma-
jority of pixels follow the whole sensor’s behaviour, i.e. exhibit
a steady decrease of counts over time. Secondly, some pixels’
counting performance remains stable. The third type of pixel
behaviour shows a steady increase in counts over time. The in-
crease in counts is usually observed in the pixels adjacent to a
pixel without a contact, thus, the charge that would have been
collected by a contactless pixel d rifts to the adjacent ones [7].
In this study we present the evaluation of polarization effects
on several Schottky
collection CdTe Medipix3RX pixelated
detector systems, and the effect of operational conditions on the
polarization. We report a new type of pixel behaviour that was
used as a criterion for optimum bias voltage reset.
II. M
ETHODS
CdTe Schottky collection senso rs bump-bonded to
Medipix3RX chips were used in this study in order to evaluate
the polarization effects and determine the optimised operational
conditions. CdTe sensors were manufactured by Acrorad [8].
Five single and ﬁve quad asse mblies were manufactured as
a part of the European CALIPS O-HIZP AD2 project. Single
0018-9499 © 2016 British Crown Copyright
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:42:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
ASTROMSKAS et al.: EV ALUA TION OF POLARIZA TION EFFECTS OF COLLECTION 253
Fig. 1. The linearity of the registered counts per pixel per second with res pect
to the current of the X-ray tube. The errors were extracted from the linear ﬁ t.
assemblies had m m pixel pitch with a
pixel matrix, with dimensions of mm mm mm.
Quad assemblies had the same pixel pitch but pixel
matrix, with dimensions of mm mm mm.
The crystals were bump-bonded using InSn bump-bonds by
Advacam [9]. The details on the Medipix3RX chip can be
found in [10]. The MERLIN readout system, developed by
the Diamond Light Source [11], was used for readout, control
of bias voltage reset, and monitoring the temperature of the
detector [12]. The results presented in this paper were obtained
using the single pixel counting mode of the Medipix3RX chip.
All of the experiments were performed using a Molybdenum
target laboratory X-ray tube with a maximum voltage of 50 kVp
and a maximum current of 50 mA. A direct X-ray beam was
used to uniformly illuminate the detector placed approximately
70 cm from the X-ray tube. The Medipix3RX chip was inside
a 2 mm thick Al casing. The A l casing had a window which
only revealed the CdTe crystal . The incoming 25 keV X-rays
were 100% absorbed by the CdTe crystal [2], thus protecting
the metal bonding between the ASIC and the crystal. The chip
itself had a
m thick Al layer deposited on it. The circuitry
in the periphery of the CdTe crystal is digital, i.e. any radiation
damage on the circuitry would register as digital errors due to
the fact that the impact of radiation would be seen as a change
of the timing properties of the circuit. This is not the case for the
results presented in this paper. The detectors were tested under
several temperatures and radiation ﬂuxes. The thermal stability
of the detector was ensured using a water chiller and a copper
plate at the back of the detector assembly. The temperatures for
measurements ranged from
to . The ﬂuxes of the
direct X-ray beam at the position of the detector ranged from
9 kcps per pixel to 300 kcps per pixel. The relationship between
the current of the X-ray tube and t he registered counts per pixel
per second is displayed in Fig. 1. The applied bias voltage was
set to
V for all measurements.
III. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Sensor-level Polarization Effects
Figs. 2 and 3 show the reduction of mean counts per frame
over time with respect to temper ature and ﬂux respectively.
Fig. 2. Polarization dependency over time for different temperatures. Th ed e -
tector was illuminated under the same conditions of 9 kcps per pixel ﬂux fro m
the Molybdenum target X-ray tube.
Fig. 3. Polarization dependency over time for different photon ﬂuxes. The de-
tector was cooled to for all measurements.
Each point in these ﬁgures was obtained by summing the counts
of each pixel of a sensor in a frame and normalizing to the ﬁrst
frame’s count value. The detect or was exposed to radiation for
90 minutes without a bias voltage reset applied. The acquisition
time of each frame (i.e. frame rate) in Fig. 2. was 300 ms. In
Fig. 3. the frame rate was 30 s, 300 ms and 100 ms for 100 cps,
9 kcps and 24 kcps per pixel, res pectively. Observations from
single and quad module detectors agree with previously pub-
lished results, i.e. cooling the detector reduces the rate of ef-
ﬁciency degradation [4]. The degradation with higher temper-
ature arises as the number of th ermally generated charge car-
riers increases. Also, the results show that the polarization is
highly dependent on ﬂux and the duration of radiation illumi-
nation. The slopes of time dependencies of normalized number
of counts in each sensor of a quad module detector slightly
differ depending on the defects. No pixels were excluded in
the analysis. Radiation ﬂux incr eases the ionization rate of elec-
tron-hole pairs inside the semiconductor. This results in an in-
creased number of free charge carriers which can be trapped by
the defects and impurities causing polarization to occur sooner.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:42:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
254 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 63, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016
Fig. 4. Flat-ﬁeld images of a quadrant of a quad detector. The detector was c ooled to . Flat-ﬁeld image of the ﬁrst frame of exposure (a). Flat-ﬁeld after a
10 minute exposure at 9 kcps per pixel ﬂux (b). Flat-ﬁeld after 90 minute exp osure at 9 kcps per pixel ﬂux (c). Flat-ﬁeld image after a 10 minute exposure at 300
kcps per pixel (d). The 24-bit counter was used to obtain ﬂat ﬁeld images (a) and (d). The 12-bit counter was used to obtain ﬂat ﬁeld images (b) and (c).
The degradation of the sensor’s performance arising from po-
larization is typically identiﬁe d as a loss of counts, appearance
of dislocation lines, and reduction in the total uniformity of re-
sponse [4]. Fig. 4. shows four ﬂat-ﬁeld images of a sensor ob-
tained under different conditions. The detector was operated at
temperature. The frame rate was 500 ms. Fig. 4(a) shows
an initial frame of the illumination under 300 kcps per pixel ﬂux.
Fig. 4(b) displays the degradation of the sensor after a 10 min-
utes of 9 kcps radiation ﬂux. Fig. 4(c) displays the degradation
of the sensor after a 90 minute illumination of 9 kcps ﬂux of
X-rays. Fig. 4(d) shows the degradation of the sensor after a 10
minute exposure of 300 kcps ﬂux of X-rays. The difference in
the total number of counts in the frame differs due to one (12 bit)
or two (24 bit) counters being enabled during the acquisition.
Fig. 4(a) and Fig. 4(d) used a 24 bit counter, while Fig. 4(b) and
Fig. 4(c) used the 12 bit counter.
Fig. 4 shows that the dominating polarization effect of the
sensor, i.e. having the greatest impact on the uniformity of
sensor’s response, differs with ﬂux. As shown in Fig. 4(c),
the dominating defects under low ﬂux and long exposure are
loss of total counts and dislocation lines, and saturated pixels
which appear in white. With the 12 bit counter, a saturated
pixel recorded a maximum of 4095 counts per frame. Under
the high ﬂux operation, as shown in Fig. 4(d), the dominating
effect is the tri-phase (3-P) pixels which count zero. The 3-P
pixel’s behaviour is discussed in Section III-B. For comparison,
Fig. 4(b) and Fig. 4(d) show the difference in degradation after
10 minute exposure but for 9 kcps and 300 kcps ﬂux respec-
tively. It is worth noting that depolarizing the detector using
bias voltage reset restored the response of all the pixels to the
original state as shown in Fig. 4(a) for all detectors including
the 3-P pixels which is discussed later in Section III-C.
The uniformity of response was evaluated using ﬂat-ﬁeld
coefﬁcient histograms. The ﬂat-ﬁeld coefﬁcient values are
obtained by dividing each pixel’s count value by the mean
count value of the whole sensor. This resulted in a histogram of
ﬂat-ﬁeld coefﬁcients as shown in Fig. 5. The ﬂat-ﬁeld coefﬁ-
cient values in Fig. 5(a) were obt ained from the ﬂat-ﬁeld image
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:42:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ASTROMSKAS et al.: EV ALUA TION OF POLARIZA TION EFFECTS OF COLLECTION 255
Fig. 5. Flat-ﬁeld coefﬁcient histogram showing the uniformity of pixel
response on the sensor. The detector was operated under temperature
and 300 kcps count rate. First frame’s uniformity is represented in (a). De tector
uniformity after a 10 minute exposure is shown in (b).
of Fig. 4(a), while the Fig. 5(b) histogram coefﬁcient values
were obtained from the ﬂat-ﬁeld of Fig. 4(d). Due to the polar-
ization effects, the total unifor mity of the detector’s response
to radiation decreases over time as the width of the histogram
increased. The skew of the distribution towards higher ﬂat-ﬁeld
coefﬁcient values in both histograms arises from the reduction
of efﬁciency of the detector due t o polarization. The reduction
of the registered counts requir es a ﬂat-ﬁeld coefﬁcient value
greater than 1 in order to corr ect the pixel’s counts to the
mean counts of the sensor. A Gaussian distribution of the
ﬂat-ﬁeld coefﬁcients is expected in the ﬁrst frame as a Gaussian
pixel-threshold calibration was performed on all the sensors
around the noise edge. The skew in the Fig. 5(a) shows that the
polarization effect is alread y observed in the ﬁrst frame.
B. Pixel-level Polarization Effects
All three previously reported types of pixel behaviours (men-
tioned in Section I) were observe d in our detectors. Further-
more, a fourth type of pixel behaviour was observed in our
single and quad assemblies that dominated the degradation of
the ﬂat-ﬁeld images under high ﬂux which has not been reported
before. The tri-phase pixel behaviour is shown in Fig. 6. The
Fig. 6. A typical tri-phase pixel behaviour with the three main phases iden ti-
ﬁed.
Fig. 7. 3-P pixels’ behaviour from each of the quadrants from a quad assembly.
ﬁrst phase was identiﬁed as a steady increase of counts. In the
second phase, there is a more ra pid increase of counts up to a
certain value of counts. The maximum number of counts slightly
varied for every pixel as seen in Fig. 7. During the third phase,
the total number of counts decr eased at different rates but al-
ways reached zero within 30 seconds, which left the pixel not
counting until the bias voltage reset was applied. Fig. 7 shows
the counts as a function of tim e for two example pixels in each
quadrant of a quad module. The pixels were neither adjacent to
each other nor near underperform ing pixels. These pixels were
identiﬁed as the zero counts pixels at the end of a 10 minute
cycle as seen in Fig. 4(d). The to tal number of this type of pixel
increased over time and they all showed a similar behaviour to
that shown in Fig. 7. Furthermore, these pixels were consistently
observed in each of the sensors tested in the ﬁrst and third quad
assemblies (i.e. 8 different sensors), and exhibited the same be-
haviour over multiple cycles as shown in Fig. 9. The second and
fourth quad assemblies were not t e s t e da st h e yw e r ei n o p e r a b l e
due to faults during the d etector’s assembly.
The physics behind the 3-P pixel’s behaviour is not currently
understood and has not yet been investigated in sufﬁcient detail.
From a preliminary evaluation of the performance of the 3-P
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:42:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
256 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 63, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016
Fig. 8. Increase of the total number of 3-P pixels in the sensor over time. Th e
criterion is met when the total number of 3-P pixels is above the baseline va lue.
Fig. 9. A single 3-P pixel’s reproducible behaviour over nine 10 minute cyc les.
pixels and their neighbours it can be deduced that the underlying
mechanisms are limited to the 3-P pixel as in most cases the
nearby pixels are not affected. This suggests that the effect is
near the surface of the crystal. If the origin was located deep in
the crystal, diffusion of the gen erated charge would cause it to
drift to the electrodes of multiple pixels.
C. Criterion for Bias V oltage Reset
There is not a standard criterion under which the bias voltage
should be reset that speciﬁes how often it may occur and for
how long the “off-time” should last. The identiﬁcation of pixels
that behave as described in Sectio n III-B provide a criterion for
bias voltage reset, since the 3-P pixels dominated the sensor’s
degradation of uniformity under high ﬂux.
Fig. 8. shows the increase of the total number of 3-P pixels as
a function of time under differen t count rates. The detector was
cooled to
and the data was collected for 10 minutes with a
500 ms frame rate and no bias voltage reset applied. Three fea-
tures can be observed in this ﬁgure. First, there is a baseline, i.e.
the sensor has some pixels that constantly count zero. These are
the inactive pixels due to either contact issues or being masked,
i.e. the electronics behind it were deactivated. The total number
of inactive pixels is different for each sensor. Secondly, there is
a stable plateau where the total number of 3-P pixels does not
change or ﬂuctuate by
. The plateau fundamentally corre-
sponds to the duration the detector is stable with respect to 3-P
pixels. The duration of the plateau region was dependent on ﬂux
and temperature. Thirdly, a steady increase of the total number
of 3-P pixels. The rate of increase was dependent on both ﬂux
and temperature. These features suggest a criterion which quan-
tiﬁes the time at which the plateau region ends.
In order to determine the criterion for each sensor a different
baseline deﬁnition is required. The baseline is determined by the
total number of inactive pixel s in the ﬁrst frame and adding an
offset of a standard deviation of the inactive pixels. The addition
of this offset is required in order to ignore the minor ﬂuctuations
in the number of 3-P pixels as shown in the 40 kcps per pixel
dataset in Fig. 8. This way the criterion takes into account the
whole sensor’s behaviour. The cr iterion identiﬁes the instance
in time where the total number of 3-P pixels is higher than the
deﬁned baseline, i.e. the end of the stable plateau. The extracted
time value was used as the bias voltage reset time. This process
was repeated for each of the ﬂuxes and the temperatures tested.
The generated criteria produced an optimum operational condi-
tions (OOC) chart as seen in Fig. 10. The ﬁgure shows the time
at which the bias voltage should be reset for different operating
temperatures and incident average ﬂux, and should be read as a
chart. The X-axis denotes the time when the detector should be
depolarized according to the criterion. The Y-axis displays the
ﬂux under which the detector was illuminated from the X-ray
tube. The corresponding regist ered number of counts for each
of the X-ray tube currents is shown in Fig. 1. The criterion en-
sures that ﬂat-ﬁeld image quality is kept at the best (optimal)
state as the moment in time when the 3-P pixels start appearing
in the ﬂat-ﬁeld image, the detector is re-set. As the 3-P pixel be-
haviour cannot be compensated for by ﬂat-ﬁeld corrections, we
consider the optimum condition to re-set the detector as soon as
the 3-P pixels begin to increase in number, in order to minimise
their effect on the corrected im age quality. The OOC charts are
reproducible for all sensors despite their different polarization
responses.
An empirical approach to ﬁt the data shown in Fig. 10. with
double exponential was chosen as a single exponential did not
ﬁt the data correctly. The double exponential could suggest that
the polarization has a fast and a slow component. The extracted
time decay constants were in the range of
s and
s for the ﬁrst and second exponential respec-
tively, within the limitations of the precision of the individual
ﬁts. It was not possible to identify any further systematic depen-
dency on the operating conditions with conﬁdence. As shown in
Fig. 10, the colder the detector the longer it can operate before
the criterion is met, which agrees with previously published data
[5]. In addition, the total efﬁciency of the detector did not de-
grade below 95% when applying t he extracted depolarization
time from the criterion.
D. Bias V oltage Reset Duration
A common way of depolarizing the detector is to reset the
applied bias voltage on the detector. The applied bias voltage
is ramped down from
V to 0 V over a period of 5 s in all
measurements. The longer the bias voltage remains switched off
f o l l o w i n gt h ee n do ft h er a m p i n gt i m et h em o r et r a p p e dc h a r g e
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:42:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ASTROMSKAS et al.: EV ALUA TION OF POLARIZA TION EFFECTS OF COLLECTION 257
Fig. 10. Optimum Operational Conditions (OOC) charts for each of the senso r
of a quad assembly: for the 1st quadrant (a), 2nd quadrant (b), 3rd quadrant
(c) and 4th quadrant (d). Each point of each line represents the time instan ce,
where the criterion is met, and its depe ndence on ﬂux and temperature. The
corresponding registered counts per pi xel per second to the ﬂux are shown i n
Fig. 1.
Fig. 11. Mean values for each frame dur ing several refres hing bias cycles f or
three quadrants of a quad assembly and for different bias refresh times: wi th a
1sr e f r e s ht i m e( a ) ,1 0s( b ) ,1 5s( c )a n d2 0s( d ) .T h eh o r i z o n t a ll i n ei ss e tto
one for a clear display of the overshoots.
is released. This was observed by investigating the 3-P pixels’
behaviour when the bias voltage was being reset. While the bias
voltage was ramping down towards zero volts, the pixel was
activated and counted more than the nearby pixels, which sug-
gested that the trapped charge was being released.
We have investigated the effect of the duration of the bias
voltage remaining switched off. Fig. 11. shows the loss of the
total number of counts for each of the sensors of the quad as-
sembly with different durations of bias voltage being switched
off.
The tested “off time” durations i.e. after the bias voltage
reached 0 V , were 1, 10, 15 and 20 seconds. The detector was
operated under 300 kcps per pixel ﬂux and cooled to
.T h e
frame rate was 500 ms. Note the mean pixel value of the ﬁnal
frame of each cycle decreased when the bias reset time was too
short. This effect is visible in the Fig. 11(a) and Fig. 11(b) plo ts.
This arises from the sensor not fu lly depolarizing, hence, taking
less time for polarization to bui ld up. However, Fig. 11(c) and
Fig. 11(d) show that the bias reset duration was long enough to
keep the detector stable in between the cycles. The behaviour
of the fourth quadrant followed the same trend as the other
three but it has been excluded from the Fig. 11. as it ha dn o i s y
pixels which disrupted the plot. Additionally, a small overshoot
is observed after the bias reset was applied. The overshoot
is caused by the sensor needing some time to stabilise. The
overshoot is of approximately 2% of the total number of counts
and lasts less than three seconds. The horizontal line is set to
one for a clear display of the overshoo ts.
The duration of the bias voltage to be switched off was depen-
dent on the degradation of performance of the detector and the
operational conditions. For low ﬂux measurements it has been
observed that a shorter “off time” was sufﬁcient to completely
depolarize the detector and keep it stable over multiple cycles.
IV . C
ONCLUSION
A Schottky collection CdTe sensor bump-bonded to a
Medipix3RX chip was used to evaluate the effects of opera-
tional conditions onto polarization. The results showed that in
single and quad assemblies the polarization is highly dependent
on temperature, ﬂux and radiation exposure time. These opera-
tional conditions must be taken into consideration when oper-
ating the system. Furthermore , an identiﬁcation of a new type
of pixel behaviour led to deﬁnition of 3-P pixels. The 3-P pixels
cannot be easily corrected using ﬂat-ﬁeld correction as they ex-
hibit non-linear behaviour over time. The underlying mecha-
nism behind the 3-P pixels should be fully investigated in future.
The 3-P pixels were used as a criterion in order to determine
the optimal time to apply high voltage reset for stabilising the
detector’s performance using an Optimal Operational Condi-
tions (OOC) chart. The 3-P pixels were the dominant ﬂat-ﬁeld
defect under high ﬂux conditions. Under the proposed method
the applied bias voltage is reset as soon as the 3-P pixels appear
in the ﬂat-ﬁeld image. This eliminates any 3-P pixels and only
linearly degrading pixels rem ain which can be easily corrected
using ﬂat-ﬁeld corrections. Whe n applying the optimal depolar-
ization time the detector’s efﬁciency did not reduce below 95%.
The proposed method is performed on the whole sensor and was
found to be reproducible for mu ltiple sensors. The generated
OOC chart would assist users of the detector in maintaining the
best ﬂat-ﬁeld quality as it allows extracting the optimal depola r-
ization time for a range of operational conditions.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Ian Horswell, David Omar,
and Richard Plackett at the Diamond Light Source for assistance
with the operation of the MERLIN system.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:42:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
258 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 63, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016
REFERENCES
[1] H. Shiraki, M. Funaki, Y. Ando, S. Kominami, K. Amemiya, and R.
Ohno, “Improvement of the productivity in the THM growth of CdTe
single crystal as nuclear radiation detector,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. ,
vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 395–399, Feb. 2010.
[2] S. D. Sordo, L. Abbene, E. Caroli, A. M. Mancini, A. Zappettini, and P.
Ubertini, “Progress in the development of CdTe and CdZnTe semicon-
ductor radiation detectors for astr ophysical and medical applications, ”
Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) , vol. 9, pp. 3491–3526, May 2009.
[ 3 ] R .A a m i r ,S .P .L a n s l e y ,R .Z a i n o n ,M .F i e d e r l e ,A .F a u l e r ,D .G r e i f f -
enberg, P. H. Butler, and A. P. H. Butler, “Pixel sensitivity variations
in a CdTe-Medipix2 detector using poly-energetic x-rays,” J. Instrum.,
vol. 6, p. C01059, Jan. 2011.
[ 4 ] M .N i r a u l a ,A .N a k a m u r a ,T .A o k i ,Y .T o m i t a ,a n dY .H a t a n a k a ,“ S t a -
bility issues of high-energy resolution diode type CdTe nuclear radia-
tion detectors in a long-term operation,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys.
Res. A , vol. 491, pp. 168–175, Sep. 2002.
[5] I. Farella, G. Montagna, A. Mancini, and A. Cola, “Study on instability
phenomena in CdTe diode-like detectors,” in Proc. IEEE Nuclear Sci-
ence Symp. Conf. Rec. , Oct. 2008, pp. 154–161.
[6] R. O. Bell, G. Entine, and H. B. Se rreze, “Time-dependent polarization
of CdTe gamma-ray detectors,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods , vol. 117, pp.
267–271, May 1974.
[ 7 ] C .B u t o n ,A .D a w i e c ,J .G r a b e r - B o l i s ,K .A r n a u d ,J .F .B r a r ,N .B l a n c ,
N .B o u d e t ,J .C .C l m e n s ,F .D e b a r b i e u x ,P .D e l p i e r r e ,B .D i n k e s p i l e r ,
T. Gastaldi, S. Hustache, C. Morel, P. Pangaud, H. Perez-Ponce, and
E. Vigeolas, “Comparison of three types of XPAD3.2/CdTe single chip
hybrids for hard X-ray applications in material science and biomedical
imaging,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A , vol. 758, pp. 44–56,
Sep. 2014.
[8] Acrorad - CdTeŁ [Online]. Available: http://www.acrorad.co.jp/us/ ,
Accessed: 2015-06-25
[9] Advacam - Imaging the unseen - Home [Online]. Available: http://
www.advacam.com/en/, Accessed: 2015-06-25
[10] R. Ballabriga, J. Alozy, G. Blaj, M. Campbell, M. Fiederle, E. Frojdh,
E. H. M. Heijne, X. Llopart, M. Pichotka, S. Procz, L. Tlustos, and W.
Wong, “The Medipix3rx: A high resolution, zero dead-time pixel de-
tector readout chip allowing spectroscopic imaging,” J. Instrum. , vol.
8, p. C02016, Feb. 2013.
[11] Diamond light source [Online]. Available: http://www.diamond.ac. uk/
Home.html, Accessed: 2015-06-25
[12] R. Plackett, I. Horswell, E. N. Gimenez, J. Marchal, D. Omar, and N.
Tartoni, “Merlin: A fast versatile readout system for Medipix3,” J. In-
strum., vol. 8, p. C01038, Jan. 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:42:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 