

--- PAGE 1 ---
1854 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 63, NO. 3, JUNE 2016
CdZnTe Detectors Operating at X-ray Fluxes of
100 Million Photons/ (mm2.sec)
Michael Prokesch, Stephen A. Soldner, Arunmozhi G. Sundaram, Michael D. Reed, Handong Li, John F. Eger,
Jaqueline L. Reiber, Carrie L. Shanor, Corey L. Wray, Aaron J. Emerick, Alan F. Peters, and Corey L. Jones
Abstract— C d Z n T es i n g l ec r y s t a l sg r o w nw i t ht h et r a v e l i n g
heater method have been speciﬁcally engineered to support
high-ﬂux x-ray photon counting applications. Pixelated detec-
tor devices absorb hardened 120 kV
p ﬂuxes up to
108 photons/(mm2.sec) without any sign of electric ﬁeld polariza-
tion at room temperature (23-28) °C. It is shown that detector
functionality can be veriﬁed using photon counting electronics
even under conditions of strong pulse pile-up. A non-paralyzable
counting model satisfactory describes the average output count
rate of the detector-electronics system as a function of the
absorbed ﬂux. Good pixel-to-pixel count rate uniformity can be
achieved.
Index Terms — ASIC, Cd-based compound semiconductors,
CdZnTe, high-ﬂux, photon counting, pile-up, polarization,
traveling heater, x-ray detectors.
I. I NTRODUCTION
C
dZnTe (CZT) and CdTe are currently considered the
semiconductor materials of choice for high-efﬁciency,
energy-resolved high-ﬂux x-ray photon counting applications
like medical computed tomogra phy (spectral CT) or security
applications like baggage screening [1]–[7].
Various melt-, solvent- and vapor phase crystal growth
techniques have been employed over the years to produce
CZT and CdTe single crystals with improved electrical and
structural properties [8]–[10].
We have extensively employed several variants of the
Bridgman technique including the high-pressure electrody-
namic gradient method (HP-EDG) and more recently, the sol-
vent based traveling heater method (THM), in which the ingots
crystallize out of a solution well below the congruent melting
point [11].
With respect to the charge transport properties of the
semi-insulating material, the smallest variations of the crys-
tal defect structure, and in particular native point defect
concentrations, can render the semiconductor more or less
suitable for different application types [12]. High resolution
Manuscript received February 8, 2016; revised March 30, 2016;
accepted April 16, 2016. Date of current version June 21, 2016.
The authors are with eV Products Inc., Saxonburg, PA 16056 USA
(e-mail: Michael.Prokesch@evproducts.com; Steve.Soldner@evproducts.com;
arunmozhi.sundaram@evproducts.com; drmichaelreed@hotmail.com;
handong.li@gmail.com; John.Eger@evproducts.com; jackie.reiber@
evproducts.com; Carrie.Shanor@evpr oducts.com; corey.wray@evproducts.
com; aaron.emerick@evproducts.com; alan.peters@evproducts.com; Corey.
Jones@evproducts.com).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNS.2016.2556318
spectroscopy/imaging with pixelated detectors, for instance,
requires material with high electron-mobility lifetime product
and uniformity, while high-ﬂux photon counting applications
demand good hole transport to avoid excessive space charge
build-up under intense x-ray radiation. Other requirements for
the latter are fast temporal response and a high achievable
charge sweep-out speed. This work is focused on the demon-
stration of the high-ﬂux counting capabilities of our THM
grown CZT.
II. D
ETECTOR AND ELECTRONICS CHALLENGES
A typical sensor conﬁguration consists of a biased, low
background carrier concentration semiconductor detector with
pixelated anode and a read-out circuitry comprised of charge
sensitive pre-ampliﬁers and analog pulse shaping ﬁlter stages
at the front-end.
Hence, one basic requirement for those applications is a fast
resetting signal shaping electronics with short peaking times
to push out the pile-up limitation when the frequency of
absorbed photons with energies above threshold /Phi1
abs per
read-out channel detection area AD approaches the inverse
resolution time (effective dead time τef f ) of the pulse counting
chain:
/Phi1abs AD −→ τ−1
ef f . (1)
Another requirement for counting with conventional signal
chains is the fast collection of the photo-generated charge
clouds to facilitate their separation, i.e., high sensor or
charge sweep-out speed. This becomes critical when /Phi1
abs AD
approaches the inverse average transit time of the photo-
generated electrons to the anode pixels. Assuming non-
degeneration of the internal electric ﬁeld, this can be expressed
as a minimum bias V
min t h a tn e e d st ob ea p p l i e dt ot h e
detector:
Vmin ∼ /Phi1abs AD
( d − 1
λE
) d
μe
, (2)
where d is the detector thickness, λE is the x-ray energy
dependent linear attenuation coefﬁcient, i.e., the inverse of
mean free path or absorption depth and μe is the electron
drift mobility.
Given the limited drift mobility of the photo-generated
electrons in the conduction band and the insigniﬁcant tem-
perature dependence of this parameter in technically relevant
temperature ranges, the semiconductor sensor speed can only
be increased by reducing the detector thickness, increasing
the bias voltage or shortening the effective induction distance
0018-9499 © 2016 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
PROKESCH et al.: CdZnTe DETECTORS OPERATING AT X-RAY FLUXES OF 100 MILLION PHOTONS/ (mm2.sec) 1855
(side irradiation, smaller pixels, etc.). However, those
approaches constitute trade-offs with respect to detection
efﬁciency, dark leakage current, noise and charge sharing.
Reducing the active sensor area per ASIC read-out channel, for
instance, can help to reduce the rate of counts to be effectively
handled at a given incident ﬂux density, however, this approach
is limited by charge sharing effects if the size of the anode
pixel pitch becomes small enough for a signiﬁcant fraction of
charge clouds to be shared between multiple pixels.
Arguably, the most fundamental technological challenge
from a semiconductor materials development standpoint is
to prevent high-ﬂux polarization [13]. This effect is caused
by excessive space charge build-up due to trapping of
photo-generated holes under intense x-ray irradiation causing
dynamic, i.e., reversibly ﬂux dependent collapse of the internal
electric ﬁeld [13]–[15]. This can increase the average transit
time of the electron clouds beyond the effective peaking time
of the shaping electronics. In this situation, pulses are recorded
with reduced amplitudes (ballistic deﬁcit) and as the ﬂux
further increases, the entire pulse height spectrum can shift
gradually below the counting thresholds. The overall count
rate will effectively decrease with further increasing photon
ﬂux and eventually vanish completely. Pile-up effects due to
increasing photon arrival frequency and slowing transients due
to space charge can convolute with this trend.
Note, that this radiation indu ced polarization mechanism
must not be confused with the long time scale, bias induced
(dark) polarization as observed, e.g., on slightly p-type CdTe
Schottky-type detectors, which is due to negative space charge
build up underneath the blocking anode contact [16], [17].
Besides operational parameters like bias and temperature,
which affect the overall hole transport (drift velocity in
the valence band and detrapping rates), the mobility-lifetime
product of the photo-generated holes is the single most
critical materials parameter th at determines if the detector
will catastrophically polarize above some critical x-ray ﬂux
or stay functional for high-ﬂux counting. Hence, the ﬁrst
challenge of CZT development from low-ﬂux spectroscopy/
imaging optimized materials towards CZT for high-ﬂux
x-ray applications is the controlled modiﬁcation of the crystals
defect structure.
III. E
XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
The detectors investigated in this study were fabricated
from CZT ingots grown with the THM at eV Products. The
crystal growth processes were modiﬁed to achieve improved
hole transport in the crystals. Typical values of the achieved
hole mobility-lifetime product as determined from alpha gain
measurements on quasi-planar devices are now in the range
of (1 − 7) × 10
−5 cm2/V at room temperature. Though
the absolute accuracy of this test may be somewhat limited
given the still relatively weak charge signals this is about one
order of magnitude up from our low-ﬂux spectroscopy/imaging
optimized CZT.
The monolithic test devices are 3 mm thick and feature
16×16 anode pixel arrays at a pitch of 0.5 mm. The counting
system is based on the eV-230B ASIC, which is an 8-channel
Fig. 1. Channel output count rate as a function of x-ray tube current
at 1,118 mm distance. All 256 pixel count rates are averaged for each tube
current (diamonds). Each channel covers 0.25 mm2 detector area. The dashed
line is the linear approximation and the solid line connecting the data points
is a ﬁt according to (4).
device with active leakage curre nt compensation and bi-polar
shaping ampliﬁer circuitry with ∼ 150 ns peaking time as
determined from low-ﬂux shaper output 1 and a single energy
threshold which was set to 30 keV . The 256 pixel probe test,
measurement electronics and data acquisition system were
described in detail elsewhere [18]. The test system was placed
in a 120 kV
p x-ray beam hardened by a 1 mm thick brass
ﬁlter resulting in a mean photon energy of ∼75 keV, which
gives a mean free path for the x-ray photons of ∼0.5m m
underneath the cathode. All x-ray measurements were carried
out at nominally room temperature with some minor warm-up
of the test box at longer operation (23-28) °C.
IV . FLUX CALIBRATION
The incident x-ray ﬂux was estimated using the detector-
readout system itself: The detector was placed at a larger
distance (>1m ) from the x-ray source, which was then
ramped through a sequence of tube currents. The absorbed
photon ﬂux was estimated from the lowest ﬂux levels for
which the channel output count rate is about proportional to
the ﬂux, which in turn is proportional to the tube current. This
is shown in ﬁgure Fig. 1.
Using the low-ﬂux proportionality constant c as obtained
at distance d
cal and assuming a quadratic dependence of the
absorbed ﬂux /Phi1abs on the x-ray target-to-detector distance,
the absorbed ﬂux at any distance d and tube current Itube can
be estimated to:
/Phi1abs ∼ cItube
dcal 2
d2 . (3)
Note that without a calibrated reference system, a more
accurate determination of the incident ﬂux can become rel-
atively involved even at very low ﬂux and without count loss
due to ballistic deﬁcit. For our speciﬁc detector geometry,
1In [18], a peaking time of 190 ns was quoted from the ASIC data sheet.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
1856 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 63, NO. 3, JUNE 2016
Fig. 2. Average channel output count rates as a function of the absorbed
ﬂux (symbol sets). The data are comp iled from the individual 256 channel
count rates for 31 tube current steps at each of 10 different target-to-detector
distances. Fit according to (4) (solid lin e) and pile-up correction according
to (5) (dashed line).
single low energy threshold and hardened incident x-ray spec-
tral distribution, charge sharing effects should lead mostly to
ﬂux overestimates due to multip le counting (rather than count
loss). Our energy threshold was set to 30 keV and the brass
ﬁlter effectively removes low-energy photons from the incident
x-ray spectrum ( < 0.1% of primary photons below 36 keV).
However, escape of ﬂuorescence photons will still lead to
charge deposition well below energy threshold despite the
ﬁlter. This can lead to underestimates of the incoming ﬂux
while this “unaccounted” charge will still contribute to space
charge build-up.
V. O
UTPUT COUNT RATE CORRECTION
With our measurement conﬁguration, the highest attain-
able x-ray ﬂux incident to the detector cathode is
∼100 Mil. pps/mm2.2 At those ﬂux levels, the average photon
deposition rate is ∼1 photon per channel every 40 ns
(0.5 mm pixel pitch). This unavoidably leads to severe
pile-up given the ∼ 150 ns peaking time of the shaper and
even longer effective dead time of the system. The latter can be
expected to be in the range of the width of the bipolar pulses
that was determined from the shaper output signals at low
ﬂ u xt ob e∼600 ns. In fact, the output count rate starts devi-
ating from linearity alr eady at ﬂuxes below 1 Mil . pps/mm2
(0.25 Mil. cps/channel) as can be seen in Fig. 1.
Fig. 2 shows the non-linear response of the counting system
coupled to a non-polarizing THM detector for absorbed ﬂuxes
up to 30 Mil . pps/mm
2. The data points are the averaged
count rates of all 256 individual pixels. Thirty-one different
x-ray tube currents have been applied at each of ten different
target-detector distances. The x-axis was re-calibrated for each
distance according to (3). The perfect line up of the combined
data sets proves the correctness of the assumptions made for
the ﬂux calibration.
2We use “Mil. pps/mm2” to abbreviate “Million photons/ (mm2.sec)”.
Fig. 3. (a) Output count ra tes from all 256 pixels at ﬁxed 457 mm target-
to-detector distance, and (b) Averaged count rates (diamonds), ﬁt according
to (4) (solid line) and pile-up correc tion according to (5) (dashed line).
This counting system can be described by a non-paralyzable,
ﬁxed dead-time model as outlined previously [19]. This time,
we signiﬁcantly extend the ﬂux range and average the pixel
counts to mitigate effects of pot ential ﬂux-dependent charge
steering on the response analysis [20]. The solid line in Fig. 2
shows the calculated ASIC channel output count rate Cch as
a function of the absorbed photon ﬂux /Phi1abs according to:
Cch(/Phi1abs ) ∼ τ−1
ef f [1 − exp(−τef f κAef f /Phi1abs )]. (4)
The major ﬁtting parameter is the effective dead time τef f
of the signal chain. Aef f is the effective pixel area, which is
about the square of the pixel pitch in our case andκ is a dimen-
sionless correction factor for t he event rate in the detector,
accounting for inaccuracies of the ﬂux calibration, energy
and charge losses, charge sharing related double counting,
etc. This ﬁt accurately describes the experimentally observed
dependence in Fig. 2 for k = 1.03 and τef f = 600 ns.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
PROKESCH et al.: CdZnTe DETECTORS OPERATING AT X-RAY FLUXES OF 100 MILLION PHOTONS/ (mm2.sec) 1857
Fig. 4. (a) Flux dependence of the output count rates from the pixels
of a polarizing test device made from a low-ﬂux spectroscopy/imaging
CZT crystal ingot at 900 V bias. Dead and outer pixels removed and
zero point added for clarity. (b) Low-ﬂux 241Am+57 Co pixel spectrum from
a 5 mm thick, 1.6 mm pixel pitch witness detector from the same ingot shows
good spectroscopic performance at room temperature.
The pile-up correction for the output count rate as also plotted
in Fig. 2 is straight forward:
Ccor
ch (/Phi1abs ) ∼ − ln(1 − τef f Cch)
(τef f κ) . (5)
At higher ﬂuxes, the output count rate according to (4)
simply approaches the asymp totic value of the classical
non-paralyzable model Cch(∞ ) ∼ τ−1
ef f [19].
Fig. 3(a) shows the output count rates from all 256 pixels
of the same detector at one ﬁxed ta rget-to-detector distance.
Fig. 3(b) shows the averaged count rates, the counting model
ﬁt according to (4) and the pile-u p corrected rates according
to (5).
Fig. 5. Comparison of the channel out put count rates with a non-polarizing
and a polarizing detector at 900 V bias and room temperature for absorbed
x-ray ﬂuxes up to ∼ 100 Mil. pps/mm2. Dead and outer pixels removed for
clarity.
VI. T ESTS AT 100 Million Photons/(mm2.sec)
While this acquisition electronics and speciﬁc detector
conﬁguration cannot be used for accurate photon counting
much beyond 10 Mil . pps/mm2, proper operation of the
semiconductor detector itself can be still veriﬁed at absorbed
ﬂ u xl e v e l su pt o1 0 0M i l. pps/mm2, which is the maximum
we can currently apply with the existing x-ray setup.
First, we veriﬁed the behavior of the counting system when
a polarizing detector is connected to the front-end circuitry by
preparing high-ﬂux test devises (3 mm thick, 0.5 mm pitch)
from a low-ﬂux, spectroscopy/ imaging CZT crystal ingot.
Fig. 4(a) shows the x-ray ﬂux dependence of the output
count rates of the pixels, which collapses above a critical ﬂux
of < 1M i l. pps/mm
2 at 900 V bias. The otherwise good
spectroscopic capability of this crystal material was conﬁrmed
on separate witness samples (5 mm thick, 1.6 mm pitch) from
t h es a m ec r y s t a l .F i g .4 ( b )s h o w sal o w - ﬂ u x
241Am +57Co
pixel spectrum obtained with such a device [12]. This
spectroscopy material has a r elatively high electron
mobility-lifetime product of ∼ 1 × 10
−2cm2/V but the hole
mobility-lifetime product is only ∼ 5 × 10−6cm2/V at room
temperature, which makes the material prone to positive
space charge accumulation and hence, polarization.
Fig. 5 shows the channel output count rates obtained
with a non-polarizing high-ﬂux detector at 900 V
bias and room temperature for absorbed x-ray ﬂuxes
up to ∼100 Mil . pps/mm
2. Due to limitations of the tube
current settings, ﬂux calibrated data sets from two different
target-to-detector distances (813 mm and 187 mm) have been
stitched together for this plot. This particular device is from
a CZT crystal with a relatively low electron mobility-lifetime
product of ∼ 1.5 × 10
−3cm2/V but a higher hole mobility-
lifetime product of ∼ 2 × 10−5cm2/V, which can obviously
accommodate efﬁcient back drift of the photo-generated holes
to the cathode without any sign of polarization.
As predicted by (4), the average count rate saturates
at ∼1.65 Mil . cps/channel when the absorbed ﬂux
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
1858 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 63, NO. 3, JUNE 2016
Fig. 6. Sequences of pulses recorded from the bipolar shaper output at
(a) ∼ 6M i l. pps/mm2 and (b) ∼ 100 Mil. pps/mm2 with a non-polarizing
detector connected.
approaches ∼30 Mil . pps/mm2. Further increasing the ﬂux
beyond ∼50 Mil . pps/mm2, we observe a slight depression
of the saturated average count rate. One possible reason is
that τef f is not strictly a constant but the average width of
the pulses becomes affected by the extreme pileup at higher
ﬂuxes causing a slight increase of this parameter [19].
For comparison, Fig. 5 also shows the behavior of the
polarizing device from Fig. 4 under high ﬂux levels. Data sets
for 762 mm (Fig. 4(a)) and 187 mm target-to-detector cathode
distance have been stitched together for this plot. The nature
of the signals causing the apparent count response at very high
ﬂuxes, which was observed on all polarizing detectors, needs
more investigation.
Fig. 6 shows sequences of pulses recorded from the bipolar
shaper output at ∼ 6M i l· pps/mm
2 and ∼ 100 Mil · pps/mm2
with a non-polarizing detector connected to the
Fig. 7. (a) 2-D map of the channel count rates of all 256 pixels at
/Phi1abs ∼ 1M i l. pps/mm2, and (b) Corresponding count rate histogram and
distribution curve. Dead electronics channels were removed from statistics.
front-end circuitry. While pile-up is clearly visible already
at the lower ﬂux, the extremely piled up pulses at high ﬂux
are completely distorted an d the amplitudes get clipped.
However, the electronics does not paralyze and the system is
still useful to verify non-polariza tion of the radiation detector.
Note that the energy information is basically lost in this
regime and pile up of reduced amplitude signals might
still produce enough counts above threshold to saturate the
counting electronics. A more detailed study would require
the employment of faster counting electronics with energy
binning capability and a modiﬁed device design to ensure the
separation of the charge pulses itself. This can involve thinner
devices and smaller pixels but while those approaches can help
materials characterization, th ey are not necessarily an option
for imaging applications due to compromises in efﬁciency and
image contrast. Alternatively, the analyses could be done by
complete elimination of signal shaping circuitry, i.e., direct
evaluation of charge sensitive or trans-impedance preampliﬁer
output.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
PROKESCH et al.: CdZnTe DETECTORS OPERATING AT X-RAY FLUXES OF 100 MILLION PHOTONS/ (mm2.sec) 1859
VII. C OUNT RATE UNIFORMITY
The actual count rate distribution of all 256 pixels can be
evaluated at lower ﬂuxes where the output count rate is not
signiﬁcantly pile-up distorted. Fig. 7 shows the analysis for
/Phi1abs ∼ 1M i l. pps/mm2, which corresponds to the lowest
ﬂux in Fig. 3 (same detector). The standard deviation of the
nearly Gaussian channel count rate distribution is ±6% for this
detector. In general, the THM-CZT detectors from the ingots
investigated so far are typically more uniform than what we
observed previously from high-ﬂux capable HP-EDG grown
material [18].
Note that those pixel-to-pixel count rate variations can be
easily corrected for as long as they are not ﬂux dependent,
e.g., dynamic lensing [20].
VIII. S
UMMARY
We developed a THM-based CZT crystal growth tech-
nology to support high-ﬂux x-ray photon counting appli-
cations. We veriﬁed that 3 mm thick monolythic array
detectors fabricated from those ingots can be operated at
∼100 Mil. pps/mm
2 at room temperature without polarizing.
The ASICs used in this study were relatively slow and a non-
paralyzable counting model, based on ∼ 600 ns resolution
time, perfectly describes the output count rates of the signal
chains connected to the 0.25 mm
2 anode pixels until saturation
at an absorbed ﬂux of ∼ 30 Mil. pps/mm2. While no quan-
titative analysis can be achieved with this test conﬁguration
beyond that point, we demonstrate that the test system is still
sufﬁcient for CZT materials evaluation up to the highest ﬂuxes
we could apply, i.e., ∼100 Mil. pps/mm
2.
REFERENCES
[1] J. P. Schlomka, E. Roessl, R. Dorscheid, S. Dill, G. Martens, T. Istel,
C. Bäumer, C. Herrmann, R. Steadman, G. Zeitler, A. Livne,
and R. Proksa, “Experimental feasibility of multi-energy photon-
counting K-edge imaging in pre-clinical computed tomography,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 53, pp. 4031–4047, 2008.
[2] P. M. Shikhaliev, “Energy-resolved computed tomography: ﬁrst experi-
mental results,” Phys. Med. Biol. , vol. 53, pp. 5595–6613, 2008.
[3] J. S. Iwanczyk, E. Nyg˚ard, O. Meirav, J. Arenson, W. C. Barber,
N. E. Hartsough, N. Malakhov, and J . C. Wessel, “Photon counting
energy dispersive detector arrays for x-ray imaging,” IEEE Trans. Nucl.
Sci., vol. 56, pp. 535–542, 2009.
[4] K. Taguchi and J. S. Iwanczyk, “Vision 20/20: single photon counting
x-ray detectors in medical imaging,” Med. Phys. , vol. 40,
p. 100901_1-19, 2013.
[5] P. M. Shikhaliev, “Medical x-ra y and CT imaging with photon-counting
detectors,” in Radiation Detectors for Medical Imaging . Boca Raton,
FL, USA: CRC Press, 2015, pp. 47–80.
[6] I. Blevis and R. Levinson, “Photon-counting detectors and clinical
applications in medical CT imaging,” in Radiation Detectors for Medical
Imaging. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2015, pp. 169–192.
[7] W. C. Barber, J. C. Wessel, E. Nyg˚ard, and J. S. Iwanczyk, “Energy
dispersive CdTe and CdZnTe detectors for spectral clinical CT and
NDT applications,” Nucl. Instrum. and Methods Phys. Res. A , vol. 784,
pp. 521–537, 2015.
[8] C. Szeles, S. E. Cameron, S. A. Soldner, J.-O. Ndap, and M. D. Reed,
“Development of the high-pressure el ectro-dynamic gradient crystal-
growth technology for semi-insula ting CdZnTe growth for radiation
detector applications,” J. Electron. Mater. , vol. 33, pp. 742–751,
2004.
[9] H. Chen, S. A. Awadalla, J. Mackenzie, R. Redden, G. Bindley,
A. E. Bolotnikov, G. S. Camarda, G. Carini, and R. B. James, “Char-
acterization of traveling heater method (THM) grown Cd 0.9Zn0.1Te
crystals,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. , vol. 54, pp. 811–816, 2007.
[10] H. Shiraki, M. Funaki, Y . Ando, A. Tachibana, S. Kominami,
and R. Ohno, “THM growth and characterization of 100 mm diameter
CdTe single crystals,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. , vol. 54, pp. 117–1723,
2009.
[11] R. Triboulet, “CdTe and CdZnTe growth,” in CdTe and Related Com-
pounds: Physics, Defects, Hetero- and Nano-structures, Crystal Growth,
Surfaces and Applicant. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2009,
pp. 19–73.
[12] M. Prokesch, “CdZnTe for gamma and x-ray applications,” in Solid-State
Radiation Detectors: Technol. and Applicant. Boca Raton: CRC Press,
2015, pp. 17–48.
[13] D. S. Bale and C. Szeles, “Natu re of polarization in wide-bandgap
semiconductor detectors under high- ﬂux irradiation: Application to
semi-insulating Cd 1−xZnxTe,” P h y s .R e v .B, vol. 77, pp. 35205_1–16,
2008.
[14] G. Prekas, P. J. Sellin, P. Veeramani, A. W. Davies, A. Lohstroh,
M. E. Özsan, and M. C. Veale, “Investigation of the internal electric ﬁeld
distribution under in situ x-ray irra diation and under low temperature
conditions by the means of the pockels effect,” J. Phys. D , vol. 43,
pp. 085102_1–6, 2010.
[15] P. J. Sellin, G. Prekas, J. Franc, and R. Grill, “Electric ﬁeld distributions
in CdZnTe due to reduced temperature and x-ray irradiation,”Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 96, pp. 133509_1–3, 2010.
[16] K. Okada, Y . Sakurai, and H. Suematsu, “Characteristics of both carriers
with polarization in diode-type CdTe x-ray detectors,” Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 90, pp. 063504_1–3, 2007.
[17] A. Cola and I. Farella, “The polarization mechanism in CdTe
schottky detectors,” Appl. Phys. Lett. , vol. 94, pp. 102113_1–3,
2009.
[18] C. Szeles, S. A. Soldner, S. Vydrin, J. Graves, and D. S. Bale,
“Ultra high ﬂux 2D CdZnTe monolithic detector arrays for x-ray
imaging applications,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. , vol. 54, pp. 1350–1358,
2007.
[19] C. Szeles, S. A. Soldner, S. Vydrin, J. Graves, and D. S. Bale, “CdZnTe
semiconductor detectors for spectroscopic x-ray imaging,” IEEE Trans.
Nucl. Sci., vol. 55, pp. 572–582, 2008.
[20] S. A. Soldner, D. S. Bale, and C. Szeles, “Dynamic lateral polarization
in CdZnTe under high ﬂux x-ray irradiation,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. ,
vol. 54, pp. 1723–1727, 2007.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 05:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 