

--- PAGE 1 ---
 
 CZT Detector Modeling for Coded Aperture X-ray 
Diffraction Imaging Applications 
J. Greenberg, K. Iniewski, and D. Brady 
 Abstract–CZT detectors are primary candidates for many 
next-generation X-ray diffraction imaging systems.  We have 
conducted a study to evaluate performance tradeoffs and 
limitations of CZT energy-sensitive detectors in coded aperture 
X-ray imaging (CAXI) architectures. We have found, as 
expected, that performance of the coded aperture architecture 
depends critically on energy resolution (ER) of the detector. We 
have also found that spectrum tail, as measured for mono-
energetic sources, is less important although the incomplete 
charge collection leads to distorted system level information. We 
have built a mathematical model for the energy spectrum that 
can be used to optimize the detector geometry (pixel size, detector 
thickness), detector fabrication (injecting vs. non-injecting 
contacts) and operating conditions (HV bias, count rate) for the 
optimum performance of the coded aperture X-ray imaging 
systems. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 X-ray spectroscopy has long been used for non-destructive 
examination of unknown objects. While traditional 
transmission-based X-ray imaging systems record only object 
densities, this information is typically insufficient to perform 
material discrimination.  Nevertheless, a variety of 
applications in medical, security, and industrial imaging 
require or can benefit from the measurement of the material 
composition of an object at each location within its volume. 
To realize this spatially-resolved material discrimination, a 
number of approaches have been developed, including 
fluorescence, hyper-spectral transmission, back scattering, 
phase contrast, and coherent scatter imaging. From these 
techniques, coherent scatter imaging has been the most 
promising approach because of its capacity to provide 
material-specific signatures in optically thick materials. 
In coherent scatter, X-rays scatter elastically from the electron 
cloud of an atom or molecule. The interference of X-rays 
scattered from different locations in the material yields 
sensitivity to the microscopic structure of the material and 
 
Manuscript received November 27, 2014. We gratefully acknowledge the 
financial support from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Science 
and Technology Directorate under contract HSHQDC-11-C-00083 
J. Greenberg is with Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708 USA (e-mail: 
jag27@duke.edu).  
K. Iniewski is with Redlen Technologies, Saanich, BC V8M 1X6S, Canada 
(e-mail: kris.iniewski@redlen.com). 
D. Brady is with Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708 USA (e-mail: 
dbrady@duke.edu).  
 
 
produces a unique signature for a variety of materials. All 
previous studies have assumed ideal detector response. We 
study here the influence of non-ideal effects of the detector’s 
response on a CAXI system consisting of an incident X-ray 
pencil beam and a linear array of energy-sensitive pixels.  
CZT charge-sharing between pixels, incomplete charge 
collection due to DOI and K-edge  escape have been taken into 
account. This work leverages previous research at Duke 
University on computational X-ray imaging through the CAXI 
program [1,2] and Redlen’s previous work on analytical 
modeling of CZT for Nuclear Medicine applications[3-5]. 
 
II. CAXI
 MODELING METHODOLOGY 
To study the impact of a non-ideal detector response, we 
conduct system level numerical simulations of a pencil beam 
CAXI system in which the scattered x-rays pass through a 
coded aperture and are detector by a linear array of CZT 
detector pixels.  This geometry is described and the analytical 
model developed in [2].  In these simulations, we assume an 
incident, broadband X-ray spectrum produced by a 
conventional tungsten anode X-ray tube operating at 125 kVp. 
This enables us to calculate the distribution of scattered X-rays 
in a mean sense (i.e., we calculate the mean number of 
photons at each energy scattered into a particular solid angle).  
To translate this into a realistic measurement, we implement 
a model of the detector and detection process. For example, 
we take into account the finite size of the pixel (here we 
choose 0.8 mm square pixels) and an energy response 
described by a mean probability distribution (this is a first-
order model, which is the most straightforward to implement). 
As an example, a photon arriving at 60keV produces a 
Gaussian response at 60keV with a constant tail of some 
amplitude (defined as the fractional tail amplitude). 70keV 
photon produces a similar response at 70keV that adds to that 
response generated by the 60keV photon. We then include 
Poisson noise by taking this mean value at each energy and 
use the Poisson probability density function to realize a 
particular photon count at each energy based on Poisson 
statistics and the mean calculated value. 
 
 
978-1-4799-6097-2/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:06:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
III. EFFECT OF ENERGY RESOLUTION 
We first consider the effect of detector energy resolution 
first. Figure1 shows raw data for a point object for three 
different values of FWHM (2.5keV, 4keV, 7keV) with the 
same energy bin size (2.3keV). Figure 2 shows the mean (and 
standard deviation) of the normalized mean squared error 
(m.s.e.) obtained by performing maximum likelihood 
estimation (MLE) for 50 realizations of random objects. The 
system response is dependent on the FWHM value as 
expected; namely, the normalized mean squared error (m.s.e.) 
decreases with a decreasing FWHM energy response (e.g. 
reducing the FWHM from 7keV down to 2.5 keV improves 
m.s.e. by a factor of 2). The result that better energy resolution 
yields better signal conditioning (even with no improvement 
in sampling) can also be seen through in Fig. 3, which shows 
that the singular value spectrum is larger and flatter for 
detectors with better energy resolution indicating superior 
conditioning for inversion even in the presence of noise. 
 
 
 
Fig.1 CAXI raw dataset for a point object for three cases of 
FWHM of 7keV, 4keV and 2.5keV. 
 
 
 
 Fig.2 Simulated CAXI m.s.e. error dependence on FWHM 
of the detector. Error bars correspond to one standard 
deviation variation among the objects and Poisson 
realizations. 
 
 
 
Fig.3 Simulated CAXI SVD for three different values of 
FWHM. 
 
IV. EFFECT
 OF ENERGY TAILING 
We look also at the effect of spectrum tailing (i.e. the 
inclusion of a non-Gaussian low-energy tail extending beyond 
the photo-peak).  To evaluate different physically realizable 
cases, we consider different levels of spectrum tailing of 1%, 
10%, 20% and 50% (defined as the fraction of the photo-peak 
amplitude).  For all of these scenarios, we fix the FWHM 
value at 7keV and keep the total number of counts constant. It 
is possible to achieve tailing of 1% using charge-sharing 
correction or discrimination schemes; however, the maximum 
count rate of the system is in this case limited. A much higher 
level of tailing is typically observed if charge-shared events 
are not corrected, which is the case typically.  For larger pixel 
sizes the amount of tailing can be as low as 10%whereas, for 
smaller pixels, the tail amplitudes can be as large as50%.  In 
general, the exact numbers depend on the pixel size, detector 
thickness, applied high voltage bias (HV), electron-hole 
mobility products of the bulk material, and photon count rate, 
and can be calculated using our analytical CZT model.  
 
 
Fig.4 Simulated CAXI SVD for four different values of 
detector tailing. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:06:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 
As shown in Fig.4, the amplitudes of the singular values 
indicate slightly better performance when the tailing is reduced. 
However, improvements in the overall m.s.e value are rather 
small, as shown in Fig.5.  For example, complete elimination of 
the 20% tail (by charge sharing correction) improves m.s.e error 
from 0.78 down to 0.69. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 Simulated CAXI rms error dependence on the amount 
of tailing. Error bars correspond to one standard deviation 
variation among the objects and Poisson realizations. 
 
Our results indicate that the amount of spectrum tailing does 
not affect CAXI ability to reconstruct the object to large extent. 
The results were somewhat unexpected as prior to this study we 
assumed that detector tail non-idealities would have a major 
effect on the response. Part of the explanation comes from the 
fact that, with only 10 or 20% of the peak pulse amplitude, the 
total count difference in the peak is small (it depends on the 
peak energy, but for 40-80 keV this typically only amounts to a 
factor of 2-3 in peak amplitude reduction). As the signal is 
distributed over many pixels/energy bins, this small decrease in 
the statistics in one bin does not too much affect the overall 
ability to perform estimation when the statistics of the 
measurement process are accurately known. It is however 
possible that different metrics beyond m.s.e. over the whole 
object (i.e., material and location) such as resolution, might be 
affected more. For example, the presence of the tails impacts the 
estimation of the coherent scatter form factor without adversely 
affecting the spatial resolution, which may indicate why the 
fractional performance degradation is not so large with tails. 
Thus, while the tails do not strongly degrade the resulting 
tomographic image, the ability to classify the material at each 
location is reduced. Furthermore, it is expected that the role of 
tails will be more pronounced in the case of highly-multiplexed 
signals in the Poisson-limited regime [6] and when strong self-
attenuation is present. 
 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
The energy resolution (ER) of the detector makes a big 
difference in the performance of the studied CAXI 
architecture. Improving the FWHM detector energy response 
from 7keV down to 2.5keV reduces the m.s.e. error by a factor 
of 2 and improves the momentum transfer resolution. As the 
energy resolution tends to degrade at high count rates, future 
work is required to optimize the count rate vs. ER trade-off. In 
addition, we find that charge sharing, if left uncorrected, leads 
to lower detector efficiency, increased spectrum tail, and 
decreased energy resolution. However, our system level 
simulation results indicate that charge sharing and other 
physical effects that cause spectrum tailing contribute only 
weakly to the performance of the CAXI architecture selected 
in the study. These results imply a high level of CAXI 
robustness with respect to detector non-ideal effects and bode 
very well for practical implementations of CAXI systems in 
material identification applications. In light of our current 
understanding of the device physics and signal processing, 
some recommendations for the future X-ray diffraction 
systems are being developed. 
R
EFERENCES 
[1] J. Greenberg, K. Krishnamurthy, and D. Brady, Snapshot Molecular 
Imaging using Coded Energy-Sensitive Detection, vol. 21, no. 21, Optics 
Express, 2013. 
[2] J. Greenberg, K. Krishnamurthy, and D. Brady, Compressive Single-
Pixel Snapshot X-Ray Diffraction Imaging, Optics Letters, vol. 39, pp. 
111-114, 2014. 
[3] K. Iniewski, H. Chen, G. Bindley, I. Kuvvetli, C. Budtz-Jorgensen, 
Modeling Charge-Sharing Effects in Pixellated CZT Detectors, IEEE 
NSS-MICS, 2007. 
[4] K. Iniewski, S. Awadallah, F. Harris, H. Chen, G. Bindley, and P. Luke, 
High Voltage Optimization in CZT Detectors, IEEE NSS-MICS, 2008. 
[5] K. Iniewski, C. Seifert, F. Harris, S. Awadallah, H. Chen, and G. 
Bindley, CZT Pixel Scaling for Improved Spatial Resolution in Medical 
Imaging, IEEE NSS-MICS, 2008. 
[6] J.A. Greenberg, M. Hassan, K. Krishnamurthy, and D. Brady, Structured 
illumination for tomographic X-ray diffraction imaging ,139, 709-713, 
2014. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:06:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 