

--- PAGE 1 ---
High precision, medium ﬂux rate CZT spectroscopy for
coherent scatter imaging
Joel A. Greenberg a, Mehadi Hassan a, David J. Brady a, and Kris Iniewski b
aDept. of ECE, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
bRedlen Technologies, Saanich, BC V8M 1X6S, Canada
ABSTRACT
CZT detectors are primary candidates for many next-generation X-ray imaging systems. These detectors are
typically operated in either a high precision, low ﬂux spectroscopy mode or a low precision, high ﬂux photon
counting mode. We demonstrate a new detector conﬁguration that enables operation in a high precision, medium
ﬂux spectroscopy mode, which opens the potential for a variety of new applications in medical imaging, non-
destructive testing and baggage scanning. In particular, we describe the requirements of a coded aperture
coherent scattering X-ray system that can perform fast imaging with accurate material discrimination.
Keywords: X-ray detectors, X-ray spectroscopy, X-ray diﬀraction
1. INTRODUCTION
Most digital radiation detectors are based on integrating charge of the X-ray photons emitted from the X-ray tube
for each frame. Traditional systems use scintillator materials that convert X-ray photons into visible light and
photo diode that in turn convert optical signals into electrical charge. 1 This technique is vulnerable to noise due
to variations in the magnitude of the electric charge generated per X-ray photon and leads to a larger weighting
of the higher energy photons and, consequently, reduced image contrast. X-ray photon counting detectors
solve these problems by detecting directly the X-ray photons and assigning each a uniform weight. When photon
counting is combined with energy discrimination, where the number of photons within a speciﬁc energy range are
counted, one eliminates the noise associated with photon weighting and increases the information measurement
capacity of the detector. Compared to energy integrating detectors, photon counting detectors oﬀer a variety
of potential advantages, including improved signal to noise ratio (SNR), reduction of beam hardening artifacts,
reduced electronic noise, reduced dose, and improved tissue diﬀerentiation and/or material discrimination.
Over the last two decades, the II-VI semiconductor CdZnTe (CZT) has emerged as a material of choice for
room temperature photon detection of hard X-rays and soft γ-rays. Due to improvements in crystal growth, the
design of the detectors and the electronics used for reading out the detectors, CZT is now used in numerous
applications including spectroscopy in astrophysics, industrial, medical imaging and security applications. 2, 3
CZT-based detectors are typically operated in one of two modes: photon counting or spectroscopy. Photon
counting mode oﬀers modest energy resolution (ER, typically on the order of 10-20%, see Fig. 1) and can work
at very high incident count rates (CR) of up to 100 Mcps/mm 2. In contrast, spectroscopy mode involves the
precise determination of each photon’s energy (with a precision of approximately 1%) but is limited to count
rates of 1 kcps/mm 2 due to additional signal processing requirements. Nevertheless, there is a critical window
between these two traditional modes in which the count rates are signiﬁcantly higher than spectroscopy ( e.g.,
10 -100 kcps/mm 2) and the required energy resolution is much better than required for photon counting ( e.g.,
2-3%). It is precisely this medium count rate range that is of interest to many new emerging applications in
non-destructive X-ray testing, baggage scanning and medical imaging. 4–7
In this paper, we focus on the development of a new CZT-based detector that operates in this high precision
medium ﬂux regime for rapid coherent scatter X-ray tomography. While coherent scatter ( i.e., X-ray diﬀraction,
XRD) has long been used for non-destructive examination of unknown objects due to its inherent molecular
Further author information: (Send correspondence to J.A.G.)
J.A.G.: E-mail: jag27@duke.edu, Telephone: 1 919 660 0183
Invited Paper
Anomaly Detection and Imaging with X-Rays (ADIX), edited by 
Amit Ashok, Mark A. Neifeld, Michael E. Gehm, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 9847, 
98470E · © 2016 SPIE · CCC code: 0277-786X/16/$18 · doi: 10.1117/12.2221913
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 9847  98470E-1

--- PAGE 2 ---
20-
18-
16-
14-
12
10
8
s
4-
2
ol
Precision Spectroscopy
Né# Generation Forward Scatter Module
for Baggage Scanning
Photon Counting
Imaging
100 -1,000 cps/mm21 -100 kcpslmm'0.1 -10 Mcpslmm'10 - 50 Mcpslmm'
Low Flux RangeMedium Flux RangeHigh Flux Range
Lower EndHigher End
Figure 1. Schematic of the tradeoﬀ between energy resolution and acceptable count rate in conventional CZT-based X-
ray detectors. Spectroscopic detectors (left) provide good energy resolution at low count rates, whereas photon counting
detectors (right) provide some energy resolution at high count rates.
speciﬁcity, it has traditionally been a non-imaging modality. Due to coherent scatter’s potential for automatic
anomaly detection in areas as diverse as cancer or explosives detection in situ, there has recently been much
interest in performing coherent scatter tomography. Initial eﬀorts of realizing XRD tomography were success-
ful in producing images but typically required long scan times and technically complicated collimators and/or
mechanical scanning apparatuses. 8, 9 Recent advances in computational imaging and compressed sensing have
enabled a new approach to XRD tomography through the use of coded apertures, which can increase the de-
tectable scatter signal by several orders of magnitude. 6, 10 To realize the potential for fast and accurate material
identiﬁcation with these systems, a new type of detector capable of both exquisite energy resolution and high
count rates is required. Here we describe and characterize the ﬁrst 2D spectroscopic X-ray detector optimized
for coded aperture X-ray scatter imaging (see Fig. 2).
2. CZT DETECTOR OPTIMIZA TION
For fast coherent scatter imaging systems, it is critical that the employed detector have both a small uncertainty
in the energy and angle of the detected photons as well as the capacity to accept signiﬁcant count rates. The
angular resolution is largely determined by the spatial resolution of the system, measurement geometry, and the
detector pixel size; in general, smaller pixels yield better angular resolution. The energy resolution is determined
by the response of the detector material and associated signal processing chain (both in software and hardware).
Taken together, the energy and angular resolution directly impact the ability to identify diﬀerent materials,
as they contribute to the uncertainty in the momentum transfer (or material lattice spacing). 6 Relatedly, the
count rate (assuming suﬃcient quantum eﬃciency) determines the measurement time; a detector that can accept
higher incident count rates can achieve a measurement of suﬃcient accuracy in a shorter time compared to one
limited to lower count rates. The optimization of such a detector relies on the careful selection of CZT quality,
pixel characteristics and layout, and signal processing components, as discussed below.
2.1 Flux range considerations
CZT detectors fabricated for low ﬂux applications (less that 100 cps/mm 2) traditionally have a good electron
mobility-lifetime product ( µτ ∼10−2 cm2/V), but poor hole mobility-lifetime product ( µτ ∼10−5 cm2/V). For
that reason, most detectors in this class use single polarity readout schemes, where the main information about
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 9847  98470E-2

--- PAGE 3 ---
40 mm
Pixel ]9T
OO° ° ° ° ° ° ° °0 0°ó0ó®®::::::::®::::::::oo°o°o°o°o°o°o°o Óo 0 0 0 0 0 0 0é°ó o°o°o°o°o°o9,9:ó®®::::::..®::::::::Eo°o°óó ó ó ó ó óEF° ° ° ° o ° °
° ° ° ° o ° o °° ° ° ° ° ° °
° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
.®®o°°° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °°°o°°° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °o o ° ° ° ° o 0°°°°°°°°o°°°o°° PE
°°°°°°°°o°°°o°°°
°°°°°°°°óo°000000
°ó ó ó ó óó °ö°°°°°o°o°o°..°ó
° ° ° ° °° °° °° o° °°a[
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° [° ° ° ° ° o ° ° a
°°°°°°°°°[óo°o°°°°ooó ó[óó ó óo.... ®.®:7óó.°°°°°°°°°[°°°°°°°°on°°°o°oa
Top View lm ough window coven/160e
Figure 2. a) Three-dimensional representation of the CZT-based detector module. The yellow region is the active detector
area. b) The pixel layout showing the 80 by 20 grid of 0.5 mm square pixels. Note that the pixels at the extreme left
and right of the detector are arranged in a checkerboard pattern, whereas the pixels in the interior are arranged in a
contiguous fashion. c) Photograph of the completed detector.
the energy of the detected radiation is inferred from the anode signals. Coplanar grid detectors (CPG), pixelated
detectors, and Frisch grid detectors can overcome the severe hole trapping problem and greatly improve the
energy spectra resolution of large-volume CZT detectors. Some state-of-the-art detector systems also utilize
cathode signals in order to improve energy resolution (ER) using various depth of interaction (DOI) correction
algorithms.11 The continuous progress in CZT crystal growth and detector fabrication has lead to routinely
realized energy resolutions of 1% with 10-15 mm thick pixelated detectors, with the best pixels achieving under
0.5% ER (which is close to the fundamental limit given by the Fano factor).
High ﬂux operation (greater than 1 Mcps/mm 2) of CZT detectors brings additional challenges due to the
polarization of the CZT. The origin of this eﬀect can be traced back to high densities of crystal impurities and
defects that, in turn, lead to severe charge-carrier trapping. Under high ﬂux conditions, the trapped charge
builds up inside the detector and eﬀects its stability; in extreme conditions, this leads to complete collapse of
the electric ﬁeld and failure of the device. Recent advances in traveling heater method (THM) growth that
require additional processing steps have enabled dramatic improvements of the hole mobility-lifetime product by
an order of magnitude. As a result, high ﬂux operation at count rates higher than 100 Mcps/mm 2 are routinely
demonstrated. These improvements allow for the use of CZT in high ﬂux environments, such as in computed
tomography (CT). While this leads to signiﬁcant advantages, such as reduced dose and improved image quality
compared to scintillator-based detectors, these high ﬂux detectors typically use semi-Ohmic contacts to avoid
polarization eﬀects which, in turn, results in higher dark currents and a degradation of the achievable energy
resolution.
Coherent scatter imaging based on coded apertures resides somewhere between these two ﬂux regimes. As-
suming a nominal X-ray source voltage of 160 keV, a source current of between 1-10 mA (suﬃcient for scatter
measurements on the time scale of a second or below), a coded aperture transmission of 50%, and a source-to-
detector distance of 1 m, we typically ﬁnd that the measured scatter signal is between 1-100 kcps/mm 2. While
this exceeds the low ﬂux regime by several orders of magnitude, we still require an energy resolution of only a
few percent in order to maintain suﬃcient material discriminability. To meet these requirements, we targeted
an energy resolution of 5% at 60 keV and a maximum count rate of 10 kcps/mm 2.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 9847  98470E-3

--- PAGE 4 ---
2.2 Pixel considerations
Given the speciﬁcations decided upon above, we next consider the thickness of the CZT material. Typical
baggage scanning applications use a source voltage of 160 keV; in order to stop 95% of the incoming radiation,
at least 3 mm of CZT is required. While choosing thicker CZT would increase the overall quantum eﬃciency, it
can become bulky, costly, and potentially degrade the overall system energy resolution. We therefore consider a
material thickness of between 2-5 mm.
For a given detector thickness, there is an optimum pixel size that maximizes energy resolution. If the pixel
is too large, the small pixel eﬀect (which conﬁnes the induced charge to a given anode) cannot occur and the
energy resolution suﬀers. However, if the pixel is too small, the electron cloud resulting from diﬀusion process
becomes comparable to (or even larger than) the pixel resulting in excessive charge sharing and charge loss in
the inter-pixel gap. Numerical results indicate that the optimum pixel size for 2-5 mm thick CZT sample is
somewhere between 0.5mm and 2.5 mm depending whether the charge shared events are corrected or not. We
choose to use 0.5 mm pixels with a 3 mm thick sample of CZT to ensure good angular resolution of the overall
imaging system.
2.3 Pixel layout
It is well-known that coherent scatter from liquids and polycrystalline powders give rise to azimuthally symmetric
scatter rings; in contrast, crystalline materials with ‘texture’ (i.e., a preferred orientation of the crystalline lattice)
give rise to Bragg scatter that is concentrated at a particular angle for a given energy and lattice orientation.
It is therefore necessary to employ 2D detectors to properly measure the coherent scatter signal for arbitrary
objects. Relatedly, coherent scatter in the hard X-ray regime is usually limited to deﬂection angles of less than
10 degrees, which therefore suggests that the range of angles that one is required to measure is relatively low.
To accommodate a fan beam geometry, which is common in baggage scanners, one therefore requires a detector
that spans the length of the fan beam while also having an extent in the direction normal to the fan beam plane.
To accommodate these constraints, we decided to create a 2-side buttable detector using the pixel layout shown
in Fig. 2 b). The detector consists of 80 x 20 pixels composed of two, tiled CZT elements (each with dimensions
of 20 mm by 10 mm) to create 40 mm by 10 mm almost continuous detection area with a very small gap between
the two).
The ASIC is connected to the CZT via an interposer PCB board, which helps to provide thermal and
structural isolation between the power dissipating ASIC and temperature sensitive CZT. At the same time, this
extra element introduces additional stray capacitance, leading to a degradation of the system’s energy resolution.
Furthermore, it requires careful signal routing to avoid signal cross-talk. Due to diﬀerences in the ASIC footprint
(20 by 20 mm centered on the detector) and the pixel layout (40 by 10 mm), the routing of the 1600 potential
pixels became problematic. We therefore chose to connect only 1200 of the pixels, resulting in a checkerboard
pattern for the pixels at the sides of the detector (as shown in Fig. 2). While this allows the remaining pixels to
be read out, the extra routing complexity and path length results in poorer energy resolution for the pixels in
the checkerboard region.
3. DETECTOR PERFORMANCE
Given the design choices and speciﬁcations described above, several prototype detectors were built (see Fig. 2).
To characterize the detector, we use an extended, 4.95 mCi source of Am-241 (dominant emission line at 59.54
keV) placed approximately 100 mm from the detector. Figure 3 a) shows the recorded signal intensity ( i.e., total
number of counts over all energies) in units of cps/mm 2. Note that the expected count rate is approximately
1500 cps/mm 2, indicating an overall detected quantum eﬃciency of approximately 30-50%. We generally ﬁnd
a uniform pixel response in the central region (except for some hot pixels) with reduced performance in the
checkerboard regions, as expected.
We next consider the energy resolution across the detector. Figure 3 b) shows the full width at half maximum
(FWHM) energy resolution (in units of keV) at each pixel throughout the detector. In the central region, the
average energy resolution is 5% at 60 keV (2.98 keV FWHM) with a minimum energy resolution of 3.2% (1.89
keV FWHM). In the checkerboard region, the energy resolution ranges from 6-15% (roughly 4 to 10 keV FWHM).
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 9847  98470E-4

--- PAGE 5 ---
1000
500
0
b)
5
x 10
15
20
40506070800
pixel
C
E
E
c4
s
2
406080100
energy (keV)
120406080
energy (key)
Figure 3. a) Distribution of pixel count rates across the detector in units of cps/mm 2. b) Energy resolution at each
detector pixel at a count rate of approximately 500 cps/mm 2 in units of keV (FWHM) for a source at 60 keV. c) and d)
show the recorded spectrum for Am-241 from pixels with good and poor energy resolution, respectively.
While energy resolution gives a ﬁrst-order description of the spectroscopic response of the system, we show in
Figs. 3 c) and d) examples of spectra from pixels with excellent and poor performance, respectively. For the pixel
with low energy resolution, it can be seen that the spectrum falls oﬀ quickly above the photo peak, while residual
counts at lower energies persist at approximately 10-20% of the photo peak amplitude. For the poorly performing
pixel (Fig. 3 d), counts persist at a broader range of energies above and below the photo peak. Despite the
anticipated poor performance at the ends of the detector, the energy resolution in the central portion of the
detector is fairly uniform.
While the detector characterization was performed here at only 500 cps/mm 2, we observe uniform results up
to approximately 10 kcps/mm2, where this number refers to the incident count rate (rather than detected counts).
We therefore achieved the target speciﬁcations of less than 5% energy resolution at count rates approaching 10
kcps/mm2 in the central 800 pixels of the detector.
4. CONCLUSIONS
Advances in CZT technology make possible pixellated arrays of energy-sensitive detectors at room temperature
and for hard X-rays. Such detectors are critical for real-time coherent scatter imaging in applications such as
baggage inspection and medical imaging, but the introduction of new coded aperture scatter imaging architectures
require detectors that can perform high-precision spectroscopy at medium ﬂux rates. To accommodate this new
approach to coherent scatter imaging, we developed a detector capable of yielding excellent angular and energy
resolution (less than 5%) as well as being able to operate at up to 10 kps/mm 2. While this detector will be an
invaluable tool in next generation coherent scatter imaging systems, there are a number of future improvements
that can be made to the detector. Examples of such revisions include implementing charge sharing corrections
to reduce the amplitude of the spectral tails, revising the pixel layout to better match the ASIC footprint and/or
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 9847  98470E-5

--- PAGE 6 ---
increasing the pixel pitch to mitigate routing issues and improve uniformity, and avoiding the necessity of the
checkerboard pattern to allow for tiling of the detectors into a contiguous array. In addition, we plan to study
directly coherent X-ray scatter with these detectors to better understand the the detector’s capabilities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Dr. Martin Tornai for his assistance in working in the radioactive source.
REFERENCES
[1] Wikibooks, “Basic physics of nuclear medicine/scintillation detectors — wikibooks, the free textbook
project,” (2015). [Online; accessed 11-March-2016].
[2] Harding, G. and Schreiber, B., “Coherent x-ray scatter imaging and its applications in biomedical science
and industry,” Radiation Physics and Chemistry 56(12), 229 – 245 (1999).
[3] Hogan, J., Gonsalves, R., and Krieger, A., “Fluorescent computer tomography: a model for correction of
x-ray absorption,” Nuclear Science, IEEE Transactions on 38(6), 1721–1727 (1991).
[4] Jacques, S. D. M., Egan, C. K., Wilson, M. D., Veale, M. C., Seller, P., and Cernik, R. J., “A laboratory
system for element speciﬁc hyperspectral x-ray imaging,” Analyst 138, 755–759 (2013).
[5] Harding, G. and Kosanetzky, J., “Status and outlook of coherent-x-ray scatter imaging,” J. Opt. Soc. Am.
A 4, 933–944 (May 1987).
[6] Greenberg, J. A., Krishnamurthy, K., and Brady, D., “Snapshot molecular imaging using coded energy-
sensitive detection,” Opt. Express 21, 25480–25491 (Oct 2013).
[7] Lakshmanan, M. N., Greenberg, J. A., Samei, E., and Kapadia, A. J., “Design and implementation of
coded aperture coherent scatter spectral imaging of cancerous and healthy breast tissue samples,” Journal
of Medical Imaging 3(1), 013505 (2016).
[8] Lazzari, O., Jacques, S., Sochi, T., and Barnes, P., “Reconstructive colour x-ray diﬀraction imaging - a
novel teddi imaging method,” Analyst 134, 1802–1807 (2009).
[9] Bontus, C., Forthmann, P., and Stevendaal, U. V., “Coherent-scatter computed tomography,” US Patent
US 7580499 B2 (2009).
[10] MacCabe, K., Krishnamurthy, K., Chawla, A., Marks, D., Samei, E., and Brady, D., “Pencil beam coded
aperture x-ray scatter imaging,” Opt. Express 20, 16310–16320 (Jul 2012).
[11] Kim, J., Donmez, B., Nelson, K., and He, Z., “Three-dimensional signal correction on u1traperl czt de-
tectors,” in [ Nuclear Science Symposium Conference Record, 2007. NSS ’07. IEEE ], 2, 1289–1293 (Oct
2007).
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 9847  98470E-6