

--- PAGE 1 ---
X-ray diffraction imaging system for the detection of 
illicit substances using pixelated CZT-detectors  
D. Kosciesza, J.-P. Schlomka, J. Meyer, Morpho Detection Germany GmbH, 
G. Montemont, O. Monnet, S. Stanchina, L. Verger,  CEA-Leti, MINATEC
    Abstract–The use of energy-dispersive X-ray diffraction (XRD) 
in security screening applications allows for highest detection and 
lowest false-alarm rates. So far, only Germanium-detectors have 
been used in commercially available XRD baggage-scanning 
systems, limiting the available detection area due to technical and 
commercial reasons, and as a consequence, the achievable 
throughput.  Morpho Detection has built an innovative X-ray 
diffraction imaging (XD i) system equipped with 17 pixelated 
Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride (CZT) detector modules for increased 
detection-area to alleviate this limitation.  A multi-focus X-ray 
source (MFXS) allows for high X-ray flux and makes any other 
mechanical movement, except for the bags, obsolete.  In 
conjunction with a dedicated collimation system the detectors 
measure the scatter from the bag spatially and energetically 
resolved, allowing for a voxelized reconstruction of the bag’s 
scatter-signature. The detector-array is required to deliver 
spectra of high quality, calling for very good energy-resolution 
and efficiencies, which is why signal-corrections are performed 
on-board.  Each module is a completely independent unit to 
ensure service friendliness, receiving just one voltage, a trigger 
and Ethernet for control and data-transfer. We will explain the 
functional principle of the XD i -system, present the performance 
of the detectors with respect to stability and show spectra of 
different materials and reconstructed 3-D feature maps.  
I. I NTRODUCTION 
-RAY  diffraction (XRD) is a powerful method for 
screening airport baggage  with respect to containing illicit 
substances such as commercial, military and home-made 
explosives, which are mostly polycrystalline and therefore give 
very distinct diffraction signals [1], but also liquids, aerosols 
and gels have an internal molecular order, and therefore 
produce characteristic diffraction signals as well [2].   
XRD probes the structure of a material by measuring the 
coherently scattered rays that obey Bragg’s law, which states 
that constructive interference can be observed from diffracted 
waves of wavelength λ under the scattering angle Θ, if the 
phase-difference of the waves diffracted at lattice planes with 
lattice constant d is a multiple n of the wavelength λ [3]:  
2sin 2Θ= d nλ                                      (1) 
Substituting λ by the relation E=hc/λ, with h being Planck’s 
constant and c the speed of light, and rewriting (1) yields (2),  
                                                          
Manuscript received November 22, 2013.  
D. Kosciesza, J.-P. Schlomka and J.Meyer are with Morpho Detection 
Germany GmbH, Hamburg, Germany (telephone: +49-40-82315-212,  e-mail: 
dirk.kosciesza @morphodetection.com).  
G. Montemont, O. Monnet, S. Stanchina and L. Verger are with   CEA-
Leti, MINATEC Campus, 17 rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 9, 
France. 
d
n
hc
E
22sin =Θ⋅
                                  (2) 
which infers, that for constant energy E, signals from different 
lattice spacings d can be measured at different scattering 
angles (monochromatic method), or, the same can be measured 
by using a broad band of  incoming energies and measuring 
the energy-resolved signal under constant angle Θ. 
This so-called Laue- or energy-dispersive method is employed 
in baggage-inspection, since only sources with a broad 
bremsstrahlungs-spectrum, like X-ray tubes, provide enough 
photon-flux to inspect bags in a reasonable amount of time.   
Due to XRD’s material specificity, it allows for high 
probability of detection at low false alarm rates. So far, only 
two commercial products have existed on the market, the first 
one introduced in 1999 by Heimann using a pencil-beam 
geometry [4]. Its obvious drawback was the limited object-
coverage, which is why it was used for clearing false-alarms at 
specific locations in a bag only. The second system was 
introduced in 2000 by Yxlon as XES3000 employing a cone-
beam scatter-geometry for increased object-coverage allowing 
for complete bag-scans in about 60s. Its successor, the 
XRD3500 [5], employs the same diffraction geometry, but X-
ray source and detector are not rigidly coupled via a big C-
arm, but instead are electronically geared via linear motors. It 
has an imaging stage for identification of threat regions 
detected by other up-stream scanners, and, hence, is mostly 
used for clearing false-alarm bags as well. Despite certification 
by the most demanding authorities for highest detection and 
lowest false-alarm rates, these systems have never been sold in 
high volume because of their high price at given throughput. 
Cost factors are the precise and bulky drive-mechanics  
X
Fig. 1: Picture of the XDi  cabin-baggage screener.
978-1-4799-0534-8/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:01:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
associated with the need for a big and heavy led-plated cabin, 
precision collimators, a 12kW rotating-anode tube, and, as the 
most expensive single part, a 100 mm diameter Germanium-
detector.  
In order to address the problems of cost and throughput, a 
completely new geometry has been proposed that just requires 
the movement of the bag, eliminating the bulky mechanics 
required for alignment of source and detector. The concept 
foresees stationary components only, i.e. a multi-focus X-ray 
source (MFXS) allowing for high instantaneous focal spot 
power with efficient anode cooling, and an array of room-
temperature semi-conductor detectors (cf. Fig. 2) to maximize 
detection area and thus the capture of scatter photons to 
increase throughput [6]. This innovative concept allows to 
build an X-ray diffraction imaging (XD i) system that is so 
significantly reduced in size as compared to the XRD3500, 
that it can operate as cabin-baggage scanner at a security 
checkpoint (cf. Table 1).  
TABLE I.  COMPARISON OF XRD3500 AND XDI
 Property Unit XRD3500 XD i
 Length m 7 3.3 
 Width m 2.5 1.65 
 Height m 2.5 2 
 Weight t 9.8 2 
 Tunnel cm² 100 x 52  62 x 42 
 Max. Power kW 25 10 
II. F UNCTIONAL CONCEPT OF XDI 
The MFXS is designed to run at a power of 6 kW and has 16 
focal spots that fire sequentially for 125 µs, repeating the cycle 
every 2.1 ms. A dedicated primary collimation system lets 17 
small beamlets pass each time a focus fires, so that after one 
complete focus-sequence a web of X-rays has swept through a 
0.21 mm thick slice of a bag when that one is moving at a 
speed of 10 cm/s. The beamlets nearly ensure full coverage of 
the whole tunnel section (cf. Fig 3, left). Some X-rays interact 
with the object generating scatter-radiation, which eventually 
passes through the slits of the secondary collimator under the 
scattering-angle defined by system-geometry. The secondary 
collimator principally consists of a stack of thin metal plates of 
1.3 m length underneath the conveyor and images the scatter 
from the object topographically onto the 17 detector-modules’ 
pixel-lines (cf. Fig. 3, right). In this way the object’s 
diffraction signature is measured spatially and energetically 
resolved. Whenever a focus fires, a trigger-logic sends focus-
number and belt-position to all detectors via a daisy-chain, 
initiating a data-acquisition period that ends after 125 µs. All 
detected photons are immediately corrected for charge-sharing, 
depth of interaction, energy-gain and offset, are accumulated 
in a data-package together with trigger-information, module-
number, pixel-location and photon energy-value, to then be 
sent to the host-PC via Ethernet. The photon-information 
arriving from the detector-array is pre-processed, 
reconstructed into the voxels that the photons are originating 
from, and then post-processed for threat identification.  
III. CZT-  INSTEAD OF GERMANIUM-DETECTORS 
The most compelling reason for employing room-temperature 
semi-conductors is the need for having detector-areas 
distributed over a width of 130 cm. This would be costly to 
realize with Ge-detectors, not only for the price of detectors 
and associated read-out electronics alone,  but also because of 
the required large vacuum-vessel, or several smaller ones,  and  
sufficient, reliable, cooling power for keeping cryogenic 
temperatures. An easy and quick exchange of such a detector 
seems impossible, and therefore is not suitable for a security 
checkpoint environment. This is also the reason, why our 
CZT-detector array consists of completely autonomous sub-
units for imaging diffraction signatures. They just need a 12V 
supply-voltage and a trigger input for synchronization with the 
source. Both are daisy-chained among the modules. Control 
Fig. 2: Array of 17 CZT-modules with trigger and ethernet cables connected.
Fig. 3: Left: Schematic of XDi  set-up, indicating only 7 of the 16 foci and 
13 of the 17 detector-modules. The bag is transported into the z-direction. 
Also shown are the meshs of beamlets that would sequentially penetrate the 
object space when the foci are switched on (here all at once). Right: View 
onto the diffraction plane. At different heights of object-space scatter is 
generated and seen by those lines of detector S that look through the 
secondary collimator into the respective direction.
S
Θ
MFXS
Primary 
collimator
Bag
Belt
Scatter
Collim.
Scatter Detectors
x
y
z
y
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:01:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
and data-transmission are realized via Ethernet. The modules 
have been developed by Leti-Minatec for Morpho Detection 
and consist of a pixelated CZT-crystal, although spatial 
resolution is only required in z-direction, but of course the 
pixelation is necessary for utilizing the small pixel-effect [7].  
Anodes are read out by the IdeF-X –ASIC [8] and cathodes by 
the ALIGASPECT-ASIC (designed by Leti). Heart of the 
system is an FPGA running a NIOS operating system, 
controlling all read-out and performing on the fly charge 
sharing and depth of interaction (DOI) corrections [9]. 
Characteristics of the module are given in table 2 or can be 
found in [10].  In order to maintain stable performance, the 
modules are held at a temperature of 22±1°C. 
TABLE II.  CHARACTERISTICS OF IMADIF MODULE
 Key Feature    Characteristic 
 Crystal   CZT 5mm 
 Number of pixels  192 
 Number of lines  22 
 Anode read-out ASIC  IDeF-X  
 Cathode read-out ASIC  ALIGASPECT 
 Avg.  energy-resolution   2.26 keV± 0.13 keV (σ) 
 at 59.5 keV (40 modules) 
 Peak-efficiency (59.5±3keV) 73 ±4% (σ)   
IV. CALIBRATION OF MODULES 
The detector-module has on-board calibration capability for 
energy- and DOI-calibration, which is performed in the last 
manufacturing stage with Am241- and Co57-sources.  
However, once the modules are installed in the XDi-system,  
sources cannot be used efficiently due to the tight collimation 
in front of them, and sources would probably not be tolerated 
in an airport environment. Hence, for calibration in the field 
the tungsten characteristic K /g302-line at 59.31 keV is used, 
dominant in the X-ray tube spectrum. 
We irradiate a foam-cube to simultaneously generate a scatter-
signal in each height of object space, and consequently on each 
relevant detector line that looks into object space. The 
resulting intensity in cts/mm²/s for each pixel, integrated over 
all foci, energy-range from 10 to 140keV for a 600s 
measurement is shown in Fig. 4. Pixels that don’t look into 
object-space or are defective have been drawn white. High 
scatter-intensities in detector lines 20 and 21 originate from 
the conveyor-belt. Lines from 5 to 20 show the scatter-
intensities of the foam-cube with an average of 10 cts/mm²/s. 
Differences in intensity between pixels can be explained by the 
fact that not all regions in object space are equally often hit by 
a beamlet during the sweep, as well as variations in CZT-
detector performance.  
In energy-calibration mode the detector-module uses such a 
measurement to perform its respective calibration. The 
algorithms are not perfect, yet, mainly suffering from low 
statistics spectra at the edges of object-space that make peak-
determination prone to errors. Two pixel-spectra that the 
algorithm operates on are shown in Fig. 6. A histogram of 
Fig. 4: Intensity on the array of 17 detectors in counts/mm²/s on each 
respective pixel integrated over all foci and 10-140keV. High intensities in 
detector line 21 originate from the conveyor-belt. Pixels that receive scatter 
from outside the tunnel-region are not shown and are white, as well as dead 
pixels. Inbetween is the scatter from the foam-cube. 
Fig. 5: Histogram of peak-positions on 2175 pixels considering all values 
between 55 to 65 keV. 89 pixels are out of this range. 
Fig. 6: Example of  two pixel spectra with high and low number of counts.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:01:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
those pixels that look through the secondary collimator into 
object-space (2264) is shown in Fig. 5. Mean and standard 
deviation have been calculated from pixels with a peak-
position between 55 and 65 keV. 89 pixels are out of this 
range due to wrongly determined peak-position, assumably 
caused by low statistic spectra, or simply because they are 
dead. The mean value is with 59.35 keV close to the target of 
59.31 keV at a standard deviation of 0.61 keV. 
V. T EMPERATURE STABILTY OF CALIBRATION  
The modules have been developed for operating at 
temperatures from 20-25°C with a target at 22°C. A long 
cooling-plate attached to the modules from underneath is 
keeping them at this temperature. However, in order to 
investigate the modules’ peak-stability within the 
abovementioned temperature-range, the cooling-plate 
temperature is varied in about 0.5°C steps to generate different 
internal module-temperatures that can be measured with a 
dedicated sensor. At each temperature a foam-cube 
measurement is conducted and peak-positions are determined 
from spectra as shown in Fig. 6. The temperature-values and 
peak-positions are averaged for all modules at each cooling-
plate temperature. The resulting measurements are shown in 
Fig. 7 together with their standard deviations. A peak-shift 
gradient of 0.1 keV/°C can be deducted, which means that 
module temperature variations within the specified range are 
acceptable. 
Long-term stability of detector-characteristics is currently 
under investigation and is important in determining the 
necessary interval for repeating calibration or replacing 
modules.  
VI. F IRST BAG-SCAN
The XD i–system is a fully functional prototype unit allowing 
to routinely scan bags. A bag is prepared with four different 
substances, a water-bottle and acetone-bottle above a pack of 
salt and a cuboid of acrylic glass (PMMA) (Fig. 8), and then 
screened with the XD i –system. Knowing focus-number, belt-
position and pixel-position for each photon, the 
topographically measured scatter-data can be back-projected 
into the voxelized object-space, reconstructing its scatter-
signature in all three dimensions in this way. A 3D-
representation of the bag’s scatter-signal strength is rendered 
from the voxels and shows the four objects and faintly the 
wheels and walls of the bag (cf. Fig 9).  
Adding up the voxels’ spectra over the regions of interest and 
available slices yields the characteristic momentum-spectra of 
the four materials that can already be distinguished by eye (cf. 
Fig. 10).  Automatic threat-detection software will operate on 
these spectra to identify threats. 
Fig. 7: Detector-array peak-positions at different module temperatures. For 
each measurement the peak-positions determined on 2175 pixels are 
averaged and plotted against the average of the 17 modules internal 
temperature. The bars indicate the standard deviation. The resulting 
temperature-gradient for the peak-shift corresponds to 0.1 keV/°C. 
Fig. 8: Bag prepared for scanning with 4 substances, a cetone, water, 
acrylic glass (PMMA) and salt. 
Fig. 9: Three-dimensionally reconstructed distribution of scatter-strength of  
the scanned bag. . Top left is water, right acetone, bottom left is PMMA and 
right salt. The wheels and walls of the bag can also be identified. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:01:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
VII. C ONCLUSION
A novel baggage-screening system for carry-on baggage based 
on X-ray diffraction has been developed. Its photon yield at 
0.6kW tube-power per 1 cm/s belt-speed is sufficient to scan 
bags and to reconstruct the bag’s contents’ scatter-signatures 
for threat-identification.  
The increase in photon-flux as compared to the XRD3500 is 
achieved by a more efficient diffraction geometry, a high-
power MFXS and an increase in detector-area by a factor 4.5 
by employing 17 CZT-detector modules, of which each works 
as an autonomous unit. The modules’ average peak-stability 
with temperature is 0.1 keV/°C within the range of 20-25°, and 
thus gives no reason to worry about temperature drifts in that 
range. 
We have demonstrated in a bag-scan that photon-flux and 
spectral quality are sufficient to generate data that allows for 
distinction of liquids and crystalline substances. Also, we have 
used the spatially resolved scatter-information to reconstruct 
the 3-dimensional scatter-signature of the bag’s objects. 
We are currently working on industrializing the XD i-system 
and realizing the automation of threat detection. 
VIII. A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Sondre Skatter from Morpho Detection, Inc. for 
providing the volume rendering software. 
We thank G. Harding for inventing XDi and his enthusiastic 
support in realizing this system. 
REFERENCES
[1] G. Harding and J. Kosanetzky, Scattered X-ray beam nondestructive 
testing, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A280, 
517-528, 1989. 
[2] G. Harding,, J. Delfs,  Liquids Identification by x-ray diffraction, Proc. 
SPIE 6707, pp. 67070T, 2007, doi:10.1117/12.740290 
[3] B.E. Warren, “X-ray diffraction” , 1 st ed, 1990, Dover, p. 18 
[4] M.Marshall, J.Oxley, "Aspects of explosives detection”, 1st ed, 2009, 
Elsevier, p. 103 
[5] http://www.morpho.com/detection/see-all-products/xrd-explosives-
detection/xrd-3500-tm/?lang=en 
[6] G. Harding, “The design of direct tomographic energy-dispersive x-ray 
diffraction imaging (XDI) systems”, Proc. SPIE 5923, Penetrating 
Radiation Systems and Applications VII, 59230R (September 16, 2005); 
doi:10.1117/12.616941  
[7] Z. He, "Review of the Shockley-Ramo theorem and its application in 
semiconductor gamma-ray detectors," Nucl. Instr. Meth. A, 463, pp. 
250-267, 2001. 
[8] O. Gevin, O. Lemaire, F. Lugiez, A. Michalowska, P. Baron, O. 
Limousin, and E. Delagnes, Imaging X-ray detector front-end with high 
dynamic range: IDeF-X HD, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in 
Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and 
Associated Equipment, vol. 695, pp. 415419, 2012. 
[9] G. Montemont, S. Lux, O. Monnet, S. Stanchina and L. Verger 
Evaluation of a CZT Gamma-Ray Detection Module Concept for 
SPECT, in Nuclear Science Symposium Conference Record, 2012, NSS 
’12 IEEE, 2012. 
[10] G. Montemont, D. Kosciesza, O. Monnet, S. Stanchina, J.-P. Schlomka 
and L.Verger, An Autonomous CZT Module for X-ray Diffraction 
Imaging, this conference proceedings. 
Fig. 10: Several voxels of each object in the bag are summed up to yield the 
spectra as shown above.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:01:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 