

--- PAGE 1 ---
An Autonomous CZT Module for X-ray Diffraction
Imaging
Guillaume Mont ´emont, Dirk Kosciesza, Olivier Monnet, Sylvain Stanchina,
Jens-Peter Schlomka and Lo ¨ıck Verger
Abstract—We present the development of a CZT-based detec-
tion module dedicated to X-ray diffraction imaging. This kind
of application requires a good energy and spatial resolution in
order to resolve Bragg peaks.
In a ﬁrst part, we present the detector conﬁguration used and
dimensioning constraints. As the input energy range is comprised
between 20 and 150 keV , we use 5 mm thick high resistivity CZT
crystals. The 660 mm2 detection area is segmented on both sides
into 192 anodes and 12 cathodes. Signals from both sides are read
jointly in order to perform multiparametric event corrections
(depth of interaction, charge sharing, induction sharing). In order
to be integrated easily inside an X-ray imaging system, the system
has been conceived to be completely autonomous: it is powered
by a single 12V supply and is interfaced with the external system
by Ethernet for communication and RS485 for synchronization.
In a second part, we describe the system readout architec-
ture and then the implementation of the data processing. An
FPGA circuit embeds a digital processing chain that carries out
readout ASIC interfacing and advanced multiparametric data
corrections. Gain, offset but also depth of interaction and charge
sharing are corrected on the ﬂow. Incoming events from different
channels are clustered together by comparing their location and
time of occurrence. The FPGA also embeds a processor running
an operating system that controls the system, carries out all
calibrations, automated tests and acquisitions.
Eventually, we show the results obtained and demonstrate the
relative inﬂuence of depth of interaction and charge sharing.
Homogeneity of detector behavior is also discussed and the
reproducibility of the performance between modules is presented.
The average energy resolution at 25 oC is 2.4 % FWHM at 122
keV and 3.8 % FWHM at 60keV and the average efﬁciency is
73 %.
I. I NTRODUCTION
X
-RAY diffraction (XRD) has been proven to be an
effective technique for hold baggage screening in airport.
X-ray diffraction imaging (XDi) is a new imaging architec-
ture proposed by Morpho Detection in order to considerably
improve throughput of diffraction baggage scanners and to
enable XRD screening of cabin baggages [1]. The proposed
XDi scanner design is based on the use of room-temperature
operated CZT detectors in replacement of cooled Germanium.
CZT detectors allows to build compact and modular detection
units with an energy resolution compatible with diffraction
pattern identiﬁcation [2], [3].
The detection module, called IMADIF (by combination
of IMAging and DIFfraction) was designed to be integrated
Manuscript received November 22, 2013.
G. Mont´emont, O. Monnet, S. Stanchina and L. Verger are with CEA-Leti,
Minatec Campus, 17 Rue des martyrs, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 09, France
D. Kosciesza and J.-P. Schlomka are with Morpho Detection Germany
GmbH, Heselstcken 3, 22453 Hamburg, Germany
inside the XDi cabin baggage screener and had to fulﬁll
the following requirements: easy installation and replacement,
simple interfacing and integration and good and stable spectral
performance in the 20-150 keV range.
As the system has to be integrated in a complex system,
ease of use and autonomy were key design criteria. The whole
system is a relatively compact device (see Fig. 1). The module
features a high level software interface hiding complexities of
detector calibration and multi-parametric corrections behind
simple commands carried by TCP network packets.
Fig. 1. External view of the detection module. It measures 170 mm ×
75 mm × 78 mm for a power dissipation of 3.5 Watts.
II. D ETECTOR DESIGN
A. Motivation and requirements
When diffraction signatures are collected, one probes elec-
tron distribution. The cross-section with a single electron is
given by the Thomson factor [4]:
dσT
dΩ (θ) =r2
e · 1 + cos2θ
2 (1)
where re = µ0e2
4πme
is the classical electron radius. The
cross-section with a given material depends on the electron
distribution through the form factor F (∆p),
dσ
dΩ(E,θ ) = dσT
dΩ (θ)F 2(∆p) (2)
∆p being the momentum transfer between incident and scat-
tered photon, given by Bragg law:
∆p = 2E
c sinθ
2 (3)
978-1-4799-0534-8/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
In conclusion, to be able to accurately probe the material
structure, indicated by the form factor, it is essential to
combine a good energy and angular resolution. Moreover, both
have to be consistent, as the ﬁnal resolution on momentum
transfer results from the convolution of both uncertainties.
Angular resolution results from a trade-off with sensitivity
through collimation opening and thus it is limited to what
is needed to discriminate threats from innocent material.
As the spatial resolution is mainly needed to have a small
angular uncertainty, spatial resolution is more important in
one direction (the angular deviation direction deﬁned by the
secondary collimation). Detector anode side is thus segmented
in rectangular shaped electrodes.
As angular resolution itself is limited by sensitiv-
ity/resolution trade-off, the high energy resolution of a HPGe
detector is not needed for a high throughput system and CZT
detector resolution (few percents) is sufﬁcient. Count rate
requirements are also relatively modest due to the low ﬂux
of diffracted photon compared with the incident X-ray ﬂux.
High ﬂux grade detector and electronics are thus not needed
too and a conventional spectrometric chain is well adapted.
B. Detector conﬁguration
As efﬁciency is an important criterion and because most
incident X-rays are in the 10-100keV range, 5 mm thick
detector have been used. For such thickness, CZT high re-
sistivity material are interesting and provide a good spectral
behavior. We used a anode/cathode readout scheme to be
able to correct depth of interaction effects. To deﬁne the
anode size, we ﬁrst carried out simulations using Penelope
[4] and our detector simulation tools [6]. Spectra of various
conﬁguration have been simulated (Fig. 2), including effect of
depth of interaction biparametric correction to deﬁne the most
interesting conﬁgurations.
Raw spectrum Corrected spectrum
Fig. 2. Simulation of a Cobalt 57 and Americium 241 spectrum before and
after biparametric correction. 5 mm thick CZT biased at 700V , 4.7 mm2
electrode. Resolution before correction is 3.6 % and 1.9 % after (for an
idealized detector).
Afterwards, we used a CZT test device to experimentally
compare performance of various conﬁguration (see Fig. 3).
Spectral performance of CZT detector mainly depends on
two factors: readout noise [5] and detector response non-
uniformity, especially variability due to depth of interaction
effect and charge sharing. Large electrodes suffer from peak
tailing and high electric noise, while small electrodes suffer
from charge sharing and are more challenging in terms of read-
out integration and power dissipation. We have chosen to use
3.4mm
2 electrodes as a reasonable trade-off. Observed noise
Channel
Counts
Channel
Counts
Channel
Counts
Fig. 3. Diffraction spectra of the same material obtained on a detection line
subdivided in 1, 2 or 4 anodes. Corresponding anode area are 9.3, 4.7 and
2.3 mm
2.
on these electrodes (Fig. 4) is typically between 170 and 220
rms electrons at 500 V bias; the variability essentially comes
from leakage current variability (0.2 to 1.5 nA). Additional
stray capacitance due to CZT and PCB is around 2.5 pF and
dielectric noise contributes to Equivalent Noise charge (ENC)
for 60 rms electrons. Shaping time used is short (0.7 µs) to
cope with shot noise contribution.
The 660 mm
2 detection area is thus divided in 192 anodes
to limit readout noise to an acceptable value and have a good
pixel effect. We decided to use cathode readout with a 12
cathode segmentation to properly estimate depth of interaction.
We also decided to handle multi-channel signal readout to
correct charge-sharing effects. The system is operated at
700 V bias in order to balance shot noise and charge sharing
degradation effects.
III. S
YSTEM ELECTRONICS
A. Readout integrated circuits
The readout system is relatively complex as it uses two
different kinds of ASIC: one for anode readout and one for
cathode readout. These two ASICs were on-the-shelf and were
designed prior the design of the detection module itself.
The anode ASIC, called IDeFX-HD [8] is a low-noise low-
power circuit designed to read a high number of small area
electrodes with low stray capacitance and low leakage current
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
1 10 100 1000 10000
Frequency (kHz)
Board only
95e
CZT 500V
187e
CZT 0V
ASIC only
53e
148e
Noise Density (aC/√Hz)
Fig. 4. Observed charge noise spectral density in four conﬁgurations. Red:
with ASIC only and a internal 20pA source (ENC=53 rms electrons). Green:
with ASIC and detector hybridization board (ENC=95 rms electrons). Blue:
with unbiased detector (ENC=148 rms electrons). Purple: with 500V biased
detector (ENC=187 rms electrons).
(typically less than 2 pF and 1 nA). It dissipates 1 mW per
channel.
The cathode ASIC, called ALIGASPECT is a transient
digitizing ASIC adapted to large electrodes, with typically
10 pF capacitance and up to 20 nA leakage currents. The
current driven through input transistor is notably higher and it
dissipates 6 mW per channel.
The total power dissipation for all ASICs is less than
300 mW.
B. Digital electronics
The system is driven by a single FPGA that handle all
system control, data processing and interfacing.
We use a multi-electrode readout scheme [7] to enable
advanced data corrections. Multiples anodes and cathodes
signals can be read for a single interaction event. Depth of
interaction is computed from cathode over anode ratio while
charge sharing is computed by comparing charge collected
between anodes. The hardware data processing pipeline (Fig.
5) carries out real time corrections:
• it communicates with ASICs,
• performs gain and offset corrections,
• sort and cluster coincident detected events,
• corrects amplitudes from depth of interaction and charge
sharing to compensate for CIE non-uniformities,
• send photon data in Ethernet UDP packets.
An embedded processor (Altera NIOS II) allows to perform
complex test and calibration sequences, also handles system
monitoring and conﬁguration. The module is then easy to
manage and to integrate into the full system.
IV. R
ESULTS
Thanks to the low noise of readout ASIC, the good quality
of CZT crystals, and the applied correction, performance is
good and reproducible at room temperature (modules are
regulated to 25
oC). Figure 6 shows two example spectra as
ASIC ASIC...
Mux
Translation
Channel:
gain
offset
position
Clustering
BP correction
Calibrations
Depth
Charge sharing
Ethernet
Processor
- calibration
- test
- parameterizing
- monitoring
Fig. 5. Event processing pipeline
measured from the output of the module. CIE corrections are
applied on the event ﬂow and are then transparent for the end-
user.
Channel
Counts
59.5 keV
Channel
Counts
122 keV
Fig. 6. Spectral performance of the module (on one good performing
anode) with Americium-241 (top) and Cobalt-57 (bottom) sources and full
area irradiation. Energy resolution are here respectively 3.2 % and 2.3 %Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
TABLE I
STATISTICS ON 83 DETECTORS
Average Std deviation
Dead pixels 1.7 2.8
Resolution (pulser) 2.1 keV 0.1 keV
Efﬁciency (60keV) 73 % 4 %
Resolution (60keV) 3.8 % 0.2 %
Resolution (122keV) 2.4 % 0.2 %
Statistically speaking (Table I), a quite stable performance
has been observed on a large amount of detectors (83 detectors
of 192 anodes). In average, almost two dead pixels (badly
connected or noisy) are present on each detector device. It can
be tolerated in a certain limit but it impacts global efﬁciency.
Room temperature energy resolution averaged on all module
are comprised between 3.4 and 4.3 % at 60 keV and between
1.9 and 2.7 % at 122 keV . Efﬁciency is in general quite
reproducible between detectors (average between 68 and 75 %
at 60 keV) but less homogeneous inside a given detector. Note
that efﬁciency has been measured in a 10 % wide window (6
keV) centered on 60 keV .
V. C
ONCLUSION
We have developed a small but autonomous detection sys-
tem to enable the production of innovative baggage scanners
based on the new technology of X-ray diffraction imaging.
Data processing, calibration and test functions are fully inte-
grated inside the module, making it easy to use and manage.
These modules perform correctly, with a good stability and re-
producibility. They were integrated inside a scanner prototype
that has demonstrated the feasibility of a XRD based baggage
screener operating at high throughput (up to 600 bags per
hour).
R
EFERENCES
[1] G. Harding, H. Fleckenstein, D. Kosciesza, S. Olesinski, H. Strecker, T.
Theedt, et G. Zienert, X-ray diffraction imaging with the Multiple Inverse
Fan Beam topology: Principles, performance and potential for security
screening, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, vol. 70, no. 7, p. 1228-1237,
july 2012.
[2] G. Harding, H. Strecker, D. Kosciesza, et J. Gordon, Detector con-
siderations relevant to x-ray diffraction imaging for security screening
applications, p. 730619-730619, mai 2009.
[3] C. Cozzini, G. Harding, P. Edic, D. Beque, D. Kosciesza, Y . Du,
et H. Strecker, Energy dispersive X-ray diffraction spectral resolution
considerations for security screening applications, in 2010 IEEE Nuclear
Science Symposium Conference Record (NSS/MIC), 2010, p. 3873-3876.
[4] F. Salvat, J. Fernndez-Varea, and J. Sempau, PENELOPE-2008: A Code
System for Monte Carlo Simulation of Electron and Photon Transport.
Barcelona, Spain: Nuclear Energy Agency Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development, 2008.
[5] V . Radeka, Low-noise techniques in detectors, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.
217–277, 1988.
[6] G. Mont ´emont, M.-C. Gentet, O. Monnet, J. Rustique, and L. Verger,
Simulation and Design of Orthogonal Capacitive Strip CdZnTe Detectors,
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 54, no. 4, p. 854-859, 2007.
[7] G. Mont ´emont, S. Lux, O. Monnet, S. Stanchina and L. VergerEvaluation
of a CZT Gamma-Ray Detection Module Concept for SPECT, in Nuclear
Science Symposium Conference Record, 2012, NSS ’12 IEEE, 2012.
[8] O. Gevin, O. Lemaire, F. Lugiez, A. Michalowska, P. Baron, O. Limousin,
and E. Delagnes, Imaging X-ray detector front-end with high dynamic
range: IDeF-X HD, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Re-
search Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
Equipment, vol. 695, pp. 415419, 2012.Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on June 30,2026 at 03:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 